---
hip: 755
title: Schedule Service System Contract
author: Nana Essilfie-Conduah (@nana-ec)
working-group: Richard Bair (@rbair23), Jasper Potts (@jasperpotts)
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Draft
created: 2023-06-14
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/pull/755
updated: 2023-06-26
---

## Abstract

This proposal addresses the feature gap of a smart contracts ability to issue scheduled transactions via the HAPI scheduled transactions.

Since smart contracts executions do not utilize the Hedera signature map they are unable to carry along the authorizations that the Hedera ledger uses to confirm an accounts participation and acknowledgment in a transaction. 

To address this, Smart Contracts could utilize the Hedera Schedule Service by submitting a scheduled transaction which accounts can subsequently sign / authorize to indicate acceptance of the desired transaction. This flow provides an easy route for asynchronous coordination of transaction approval.

## Motivation

In many decentralized scenarios a contract may issue a transaction that would require participation by multiple entities.

This essentially means multi party operations are made challenging if not infeasible when using smart contracts.

This is a step back in the Hedera UX that was made easier by the use of in transaction signatures.

## Rationale

By providing a secure mechanism to acquire asynchronous authorization from multiple accounts, smart contracts can continue to be used for more decentralized operations while still maintaining the integrity of account sovereignty by allowing accounts to approve and confirm their participation in a transaction.

## User stories

1. As an EOA I would like to initiate a smart contract transaction that schedules a supported transaction.
2. As an EOA I would like to initiate a smart contract transaction that allows me to sign a scheduled transaction.
3. As an EOA I would like to initiate a smart contract transaction that prompts a contract to authorize a scheduled transaction.
4. As an EOA I would like to initiate a smart contract transaction that allows me to extract information about a scheduled transaction.
  
## Specification

HSCS will utilize the existing scheduled transaction service supported on the ledger within the system contract logic.

To achieve this a new Hedera Schedule Service (HSS) system contract will need to be created to encompass and expose the necessary scheduled transaction features.

### Hedera Schedule Service (HSS) system contract

A new `IHederaScheduleService` interface will be implemented to allow accounts to authorize a pre-existing scheduled transaction via smart contracts

|   Hash        |   Selector                                                                                        |   In contract support |
|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|
| `0xf0637961`  | `authorizeSchedule(address) external returns (int64 responseCode)`                                | Y                     |
| `0x5e147101`  | `getScheduledTransactionInfo(address) external returns (bytes memory transactionProtobufBytes)`   | Y                     |
| `0xd797b304`  | `signSchedule(address) external returns (int64 responseCode)`                                     | N                     |
| `0x358eeb03`  | `signSchedule(address, bytes) external returns (int64 responseCode)`                              | Y                     |

Since `signSchedule(address scheduleAddress) returns (int64 responseCode)` relies on an implicit signature it will only be callable by EOA’s via the IHRC facade.
In this case the signature will be the inner ECDSA signature found in the RLP encoded `EthereumTransaction`. 
For `ContractCall` and `ContractCreate` transactions any applicable signature found in the signature map will be utilized just as with [ScheduleSign](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/blob/main/services/schedule_sign.proto#L50).

Note this HIP does not provide an API to create a scheduled transaction. This is left to future HIPs to present the appropriate transactions that may be scheduled.
No further protobuf or application level changes are needed as HSS is already implemented and functional.

## Backwards Compatibility

Backwards compatibility is ensured as no existing features are modified. Similar to HTS system contract this HIP simply exposes HAPI entity functionality and the system comtract will utilize the same HAPI services on the node.

## Security Implications

Existing security consideration such as throttles will remain applicable. 
Additional considerations may include storage and fees.

### Storage considerations

Schedule transaction timespan will continue to be honored and scheduled transactions will be removed from memory upon execution or expiration.

### Fee considerations

Gas collections should encompass the following aspects of the network

- Storage cost via fees
- EVM execution work via gas
- Consensus Node execution work via fees

## How to Teach This
- Additional documentation
- Smart Contract library repo examples
- Doc site tutorials


## Reference Implementation


## Rejected Ideas


## Open Issues


## References

- https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/blob/develop/hedera-node/docs/scheduled-transactions/revised-spec.md
- https://docs.hedera.com/guides/docs/hedera-api/schedule-service
- https://docs.hedera.com/guides/docs/sdks/schedule-transaction
- https://docs.hedera.com/guides/docs/mirror-node-api/rest-api#schedule-transactions

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
