---
hip: 782
title: Smoothing Staking Rewards
author: Leemon Baird <leemon@swirldslabs.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Core
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Final
last-call-date-time: 2023-08-09T07:00:00Z"
release: v0.40.0
created: 2023-08-01
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/pull/782
replaces: 406
updated: 2023-09-13
---

Note: This hip does not replace all of hip-406 Staking. It replaces only replaces a small part. Otherwise, hip-406 still stands.

## Abstract

This HIP describes a change to the staking reward system for proof of stake described in HIP-406. HIP-406 gives rewards at a constant reward rate until the unreserved balance of account `0.0.800` is empty, then suddenly drops to a near zero reward rate. This HIP defines a change so that as `0.0.800` approaches being empty, the reward rate decreases smoothly rather than with an abrupt drop.

## Motivation

## Rationale

## User Stories

## Specification

In the original HIP, there is a setting `stakingRewardRate`, and rewards are given at that rate until the unreserved balance of account `0.0.800` is empty, at which point it abruptly drops to simply distributing each day whatever came in to that account the previous day, such as through transaction fees.   

The change is to remove this settings, and have `stakingRewardRate` automatically change each day, based on the balance of `0.0.800` and three settings: `maxRewardRate`, `rewardBalanceThreshold`, and `maxStakeRewarded`.  The `maxRewardRate` (in tinybars earned per hbar staked per day) is the rate to pay normally (i.e., when `0.0.800` has a large balance, and not too many hbars are staked for reward). When the balance of `0.0.800` drops below `rewardBalanceThreshold` (in tinybars), then the `stakingRewardRate` drops smoothly as the balance drops. If the hbars staked for reward exceed `maxStakeRewarded` (in tinybars), then there is a further decrease.
    
Let `unreservedBalance` (in tinybars) be the balance of account `0.0.800` minus the amount of rewards that have been earned but not yet distributed. Let `stakedForReward` (in tinybars) be the total balance of all accounts on Hedera that have been staked for reward (so it ignores accounts that stake but decline a reward). Then each day, just before the HIP-406 reward calculations are performed using `stakingRewardRate`, recalculate `stakingRewardRate` as follows (implemented with equivalent results, but using integer calculations, rather than the real-number calculations shown):
    
```
//A real number proportional to the unreserved balance, from 0 for empty, up to 1 at the threshold.
balanceRatio = min(unreservedBalance, rewardBalanceThreshold) / rewardBalanceThreshold;

stakingRewardRate = maxRewardRate
                      * balanceRatio * (2 – balanceRatio) 
                      * min(1, maxStakeRewarded / stakedForReward)

```

## Backwards Compatibility

This has no effect on HAPI or on transactions.  It just affects the amount of daily staking rewards received by accounts that stake for reward, when `0.0.800` has a low balance.

## Security Implications

None.

## How to Teach This

## Reference Implementation

## Rejected Ideas

## Open Issues / FAQ

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
