---
hip: 227
title: Mirror Node Search Contract Execution Log REST API
author: Nana Essilfie-Conduah (@Nana-EC)
type: Standards Track
category: Mirror
needs-council-approval: Yes
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/264
status: Final
last-call-date-time: 2021-12-20T07:00:00Z
release: v0.47.0
created: 2021-11-18
updated: 2023-02-01
---

## Abstract

An additional Mirror Node REST API endpoint is described which would allow users to search across topics for a particular contracts execution results.

## Motivation

The current Mirror Node supports the ingestion of contract information and contract executions results and logs.
It supports the retrieval of top level contract information, however, it does not support the filtering of contract execution result logs.
When methods in a contract are run users currently have to rely on network calls and transaction success or failure to determine execution details.
Retrieving filtered transaction logs is common practice in the EVM space and the Mirror Node should provide endpoints on its existing API to support new and existing users.

## Rationale

The proposal seeks to expand Mirror Node Smart Contract Service 2.0 support by exposing contract execution result logs filtering as is standard in many full archive nodes.
This new endpoint would provide insight into function execution logs.

## User stories

As a user, I want to filter through and view the results of a smart contracts method execution 

## Specification

A new endpoint `/api/v1/contracts/{id}/results/logs` will be added to supports users filtering contract execution result logs.

The following JSON represents a typical response result from either of these calls
```json
{
  "logs": [
    {
      "address": "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000001234",
      "bloom": "0x1513001083c899b1996ec7fa33621e2c340203f0",
      "contract_id": "0.0.1002",
      "data": "0x8f705727c88764031b98fc32c314f8f9e463fb62",
      "index": 0,
      "root_contract_id": null,
      "timestamp": "12345.10002",
      "topics": [
        "0xddf252ad1be2c89b69c2b068fc378daa952ba7f163c4a11628f55a4df523b3ef",
        "0x59d088293f09d5119d5b55858b989ffce4d398dc"
      ]
    },
    {
      "address": "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000001893",
      "bloom": "0x8f705727c88764031b98fc32c314f8f9e463fb62",
      "contract_id": "0.0.1003",
      "data": "0x1513001083c899b1996ec7fa33621e2c340203f0",
      "index": 1,
      "root_contract_id": "0.0.1002",
      "timestamp": "12345.10002",
      "topics": [
        "af846d22986843e3d25981b94ce181adc556b334ccfdd8225762d7f709841df0",
        "0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000765"
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

Optional filters

- `index`: The unique log index within a particular contract result. Starts at zero and increases.
- `limit`: The maximimum number of items to return in response.
- `order`: The order in which items are listed - asc or desc (default). Sort fields are `timestamp` then `index`.
- `timestamp`: The consensus timestamp in `seconds.nanoseconds` format. Required when a topic is specified and should not span a time range of more than seven days.  Supports optional comparison operators `gt`, `gte`, `lt`, `lte`, or `eq`.
- `topic0`: The first topic associated with a contract log. Topic should be hex encoded with `0x` characters optional.
- `topic1`: The second topic associated with a contract log. Topic should be hex encoded with `0x` characters optional.
- `topic2`: The third topic associated with a contract log. Topic should be hex encoded with `0x` characters optional.
- `topic3`: The fourth topic associated with a contract log. Topic should be hex encoded with `0x` characters optional.

> **_NOTE:_** Paging will not be supported if number of logs exceed the page size (default 25), optional parameters will need to be adjusted by callers in this case.

## Backwards Compatibility

This additional API endpoint does not alter exsiting REST API functionality.

## How to Teach This

- Hedera Mirror Node design document
- Description and code examples of queries added to Hedera REST API documentation section
- The OpenAPI spec at `api/v1/docs` should be updated to reflect the new endpoints and allow users to test out the calls.
- Reviewed in Engineering Insights


## References

- https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/blob/main/services/contract_call_local.proto

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
