---
hip: 206
title: Hedera Token Service Precompiled Contract for Hedera SmartContract Service
author: Danno Ferrin <danno.ferrin@gmail.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Accepted
last-call-date-time: 2021-11-26T07:00:00Z
created: 2021-11-04
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/208
updated: 2022-01-10, 2021-11-11, 2021-11-30
---

## Abstract

Describe the integration of Hedera Token Service (HTS) with the Hedera Smart
Contract Service (HSCS), allowing contracts to transfer, mint, burn, associate,
and dissociate tokens programmatically.

## Motivation

The fusion of the high performance token system in Hedera with programmatic
contracts is a frequently requested feature. Specifically, the ability to manage
tokens outside the smart contract service as well as via smart contracts.

## Rationale

To bridge the EVM and Hedera services it will be necessary to use the EVM's
precompiled contract facility. Because of the integration with Solidity it is
also valuable to be able to treat the precompile as a system contract. Hence, a
precompile whose input data follows the solidity calling conventions addresses
both needs.

There are also 3 perspectives on the HTS System. The first perspective is with
the same level of specificity the gRPC calls provide to the mapped service
message. A second perspective is of Smart Contract authors trying to make
gas-efficient calls. The third perspective is Smart Contract Engineers who want
to treat HTS tokens as much as ERC-20 tokens as possible. 

There are 5 main calls: transfer, mint, burn, associate, and dissociate. A layer
of convince calls with explicit mapping to those main 5 calls will be provided
for the second perspective. This third perspective is out of scope for this HIP
and will be addressed in a later HIP.

## User stories

As a smart contract developer, I want to be able to transfer, mint, burn,
associate, and dissociate smart contract tokens through solidity contract calls.

As a smart contract developer, I want my smart contract to be able to transfer,
mint, burn, associate, and dissociate tokens where authorization is granted
because my smart contract initiated the call and without any other signatures.

## Specification

### EVM Precompile

The precompile address will be `0x167`, decimal 359 (U+0167 is lower case t-bar
'&#359;'). The precompile input data will follow the calling conventions of
Solidity ABI version 2. Version 2 is required to use multidimensional arrays.
Only the `tokenTransfer` method is not compatible with  ABI version 1.

#### Solidity Function Signatures

The [Solidity file for development](../assets/hip-206/solidity/IHederaTokenService.sol)
contains the function signatures that the precompile will respond to. It is
included in this HIP by reference.

The `tokenTransfer` message will be supported by five distinct functions. The
principal function `tokenTransfer` use of the ABIv2 multidimensional array
encoding and supports the full atomic transfer of multiple token types in one
transaction.

To accommodate ABIv1 use four functions with a more focused application are
provided. Two party single token transfers are supported
by `tokenTransferSingle` for fungible tokens and `tokenTransferNFT` for NFTs.
Two `AccountAmount` or a single `NFTTransfer` structs will be created for these
calls.

To do bulk transfers in a single token type the `tokenTransferBulk`
and `tokenTransferBulkNFT` support fungible and non-fungible transfers between
multiple parties. The size of each array for both calls needs to be the same,
and each array index represents a separate `AccountAmount` or `NFTTransfer`
object.

The four remaining functions `tokenMint`, `tokenBurn`, `associateTokens`,
and `dissociateTokens` serve as direct mappings to their respective gRPC calls.

All functions return the `responseCode` that would be generated by calling their
counterparts via gRPC. In addition to the response codes The `tokenMint`
and `tokenBurn` methods return the new total supply after their operation
and `tokenMint` returns the new NFT serial numbers if new NFTs are generated.

The ABI signature and hashes for each call are as follows

| hash       | signature                                                                 | return               |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |----------------------|
| `189a554c` | `cryptoTransfer((address,(address,int64)[],(address,address,int64)[])[])` | `(int)`              |
| `82bba493` | `transferTokens(address,address[],int64[])`                               | `(int)`              |
| `eca36917` | `transferToken(address,address,address,int64)`                            | `(int)`              |
| `2c4ba191` | `transferNFTs(address,address[],address[],int64[])`                       | `(int)`              |
| `5cfc9011` | `transferNFT(address,address,address,int64)`                              | `(int)`              |
| `278e0b88` | `mintToken(address,uint64,bytes[])`                                       | `(int,uint64,int[])` |
| `acb9cff9` | `burnToken(address,uint64,int64[])`                                       | `(int,uint64)`       |
| `2e63879b` | `associateTokens(address,address[])`                                      | `(int)`              |
| `49146bde` | `associateToken(address,address[])`                                       | `(int)`              |
| `78b63918` | `dissociateTokens(address,address[])`                                     | `(int)`              |
| `099794e8` | `dissociateToken(address,address[])`                                      | `(int)`              |

#### Precompile Gas Costs

The gas cost of the precompile will be variable based on the specific function
called, but will not be less than 1 gas per byte of data in the input data. Gas
will be priced so that it will be cheaper to do calls directly to HTS rather
than through HSCS where such calls are possible.

| Function                 | Base Cost |  Incremental Cost |
| ------------------------ | --------: | ----------------: |
| Transfers                |    xx Gas | xx Gas / Transfer |
| Mint and Burn            |    xx Gas |             0 Gas |
| Associate and Dissociate |    xx Gas |    xx Gas / Token |

Transfers are the `cryptoTransfer`, `transferToken`, `transferTokens`,
`transferNFT`, and `transferNFTs` functions. A transfer is considered an item in
either of the NFT or token transfer list. `transferToken` and `transferNFT` have
2 transfers implicit in the function call.

Mint and Burn are the `mintToken` and `burnToken` functions.

Associate and Dissociate are the `associateToken`, `associateTokens`,
`dissociateToken`, and `dissociateTokens` functions.

### Contract Key

To support contracts controlling features like minting and burning the defined
but up until now unused field `contractID` in the `Key` protobuf message will be
utilised. When a token has a contract key as the admin key or one of the admin
keys then that key is considered validated if the `CALLER` of the relevant
method is the contract identified in the call. This is the effect of a `CALL`
operation in the EVM.

#### Delegatable Contract Key

Some smart contracts may want to delegate control to a library contract. In
order to allow this and preserve the default security of only permitting direct
contract calls to the EVM a second contract key field `delegatableContractKey`
will be added to the `Key` protobuf message. The requirement for authorization
will be that only the `CALLER` of the call be the authorized contract ID. This
will allow contracts to do a `DELEGATECALL` to the library and then the
library (or any of the other sub-libraries it then `DELEGATECALL`s to)
can `CALL` the precompile contract and have the authorization granted as though
it was the origin of the current delegate call chain.

Using a `contractKey` is the safer options and is recommended as the default
contract level security.  `delegatableContractKey` should only be used when the
library is fully known and audited ahead of time.

### Signature Verification

For operations that require signature verification the signatures of the top
level contract call are considered, in addition to the immediate caller of the
operation. This may result in a contract call that may need to be signed by more
than the initial caller of the smart contract.

In order for a signature to be used for verification, the entire public key
needs to be stored in the `pubKeyPrefix` field of the `SignaturePair` message.
Any partial prefixes provided in the signature map will be ignored and will not
properly authorize the contract, even if the signature is valid. This is the
current practice of the Hedera supplied SDKs.

### Precompile Transaction Records

Whenever a precompile performs an action that is equivalent to a top level
transaction a transaction record must be produced in the record stream
corresponding to that transaction. This transaction record also needs to be
traceable between parent and child. To facilitate this a few fields will be
added to the standard protobuf definitions.

#### TransactionID `nonce` field

A new `nonce` field of will be added to the `TransactionID`
message. Each child transaction will use the next sequential value of `nonce`
that is unused.

In addition to use for precompiled contracts this nonce field will be used by
scheduled transactions and other future transactions that may have 
child as part of their design.

There will be an upper limit of 500 child transactions per transaction. If that
limit is reached then the remaining precompile calls must fail.

#### Transaction Record `parent_consensus_timestamp` field

Each record that is a child transaction will need to populate
the `parent_consensus_timestamp` that has the timestamp of the parent
transaction. Transactions that have no parent will not populate this field

#### Querying child Transactions

Support for querying child transactions will be added to
the `TransactionGetReceiptQuery` and `TransactionGetRecordQuery` messages via
a `include_child_receipts` and `include_child_records` boolean field in each
query. When that field is set to true the repeated `child_transaction_receipts`
and `child_transaciton_records` fields in the response message will contain the
relevant child transactions for the requested transaction.

### `REVERTED_SUCCESS` ResponseCode

Whenever a precompiled contract succeeds but is later reverted within the smart
contract (for example, a `REVERT` operation was executed or the frame ran out of
gas) the return status will be set to `REVERT_SUCCESS`. 

While other fields will be set to non-success values (such as listing no crypto
transfers) the `contractCallResult` and `ContractCreateResult` field appropriate
to the transaciton will need to remain with the values used in the EVM. This is
needed to ensure that the smart contract call can be replayed in external
programs.

## Backwards Compatibility

There is no previous implementation of HTS in the HSCS. There is also no
conflict with existing ERC-20s that are EVM only. Migration of existing
contracts is out of scope for this HIP.

All the new protobuf fields are optional. The zero/empty value has the
appropriate meaning for transactions without child transactions and transactions
that are not themselves a child transaction.

## Security Implications

### Admin Key Call Depth

Controllers of admin keys will need to be careful signing smart contract calls.
As their authorization extends to the entire call stack the signers need to make
sure that any HTS calls made as a consequence of the initial function call are
intended. These calls could be multiple levels deep and crafty contracts can
manipulate the calls based on stored state.

Mitigations include relying on contract keys exclusively, using a threshold
signature that includes a contract key, only signing contract calls for known
and audited sources, and only signing direct HTS calls while relying on a
threshold scheme to allow contracts to also perform actions per smart contract
rules.

### Delegatable Contract Keys and `DELEGATECALL`

Care needs to be taken writing contracts that are expected to call the HTS
precompile contracts via `DELEGATECALL` into libraries. It is possible to write
libraries that can arbitrarily call external code via after-the-fact
configuration. Before enabling this key administrators should ensure that only
known contracts are called. In many cases these will be contracts authored by
the same team, but extra special scrutiny should be given to calling third party
contracts.

## How to Teach This

SDK tutorials should include examples of how to use the precompile contracts.

Documentation talking about admin keys will need to be updated to address the 
implication of contract keys, including threshold signatures including contract 
keys.

## Reference Implementation

* Protobuf Changes - [hashgraph/hedera-protobufs PR#120](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/pull/120)
* Services Implementation - [hashgraph/hedera-services PR#2771](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/pull/2771)
 
Current target is 0.21.0.

## Rejected Ideas

Making Token Accounts behave like ERC-20 and ERC-721 contracts has been moved
outside the scope of this hip.

## Open Issues

- Gas Charged needs to be finalized.

## References

- [Hedera Token Service Developer Docs](https://docs.hedera.com/guides/docs/hedera-api/token-service)
- Solidity Support Code
  - [Response Codes](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-smart-contracts/blob/main/hts-precompile/HederaResponseCodes.sol)
  - [Interface ABI Calculations](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-smart-contracts/blob/main/hts-precompile/IHederaTokenService.sol)
  - [Helper Class](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-smart-contracts/blob/main/hts-precompile/HederaTokenService.sol) to avoid Solidity's EXTCODESIZE check.

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
