---
hip: 573
title: Blanket exemptions for custom fee collectors
author: Michael Tinker (@tinker-michaelj)
working-group: Ken Anderson (@kenthejr), Richard Bair (@rbair23), Nick Poorman (@nickpoorman)
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Final
last-call-date-time: 2022-09-27T07:00:00Z
release: v0.31.0
created: 2022-09-08
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/571
replaces: 18
updated: 2023-02-01
---

## Abstract

We propose to give token creators the option to exempt _all_ of their token's fee collectors from a custom 
fee. This differs from current network behavior, which only exempts a fee collector from fees for which it 
is the collector. The new option adds a single new protobuf field in the `CustomFee` message,
```
message CustomFee {
  ...
  AccountID fee_collector_account_id = 3;
  bool all_collectors_are_exempt = 4;
}
```

## Motivation

The tokenomics of a fungible token with several fee collectors can be awkward when these collectors try to
exchange units of the token. For example, suppose we create a fungible token `0.0.T` with three fractional
fees:
  - Fee #1 sends `1/100` of the transferred value to collector `0.0.A`.
  - Fee #2 sends `2/100` of the transferred value to collector `0.0.B`.
  - Fee #3 sends `3/100` of the transferred value to collector `0.0.C`.

Say collector `0.0.B` sends `10_000` units of the token to `0.0.A`. Account `0.0.B` is exempt from fee #2 
(since it is the collector). And since `0.0.A` collects fee #1, there is no observable impact of that fee either. 
But fee #3 diverts `300` units away from `0.0.A` and gives them to `0.0.C`.

We can try to "clean up" by sending those `300` units from `0.0.C` to `0.0.A`---but now fee #2 diverts `6` units
back to `0.0.B`! Clearly this is a hassle.

What we really want is to make _all_ of `0.0.A`, `0.0.B`, and `0.0.C` exempt from each of fees #1, #2, and #3.
That is, we want an option to define our custom fees with `all_collectors_are_exempt = true`.

## Rationale

By extending the definition of a custom fee via this `all_collectors_are_exempt` flag, we provide the 
most flexibility to token creators; and avoid surprising any users who may be depending on the current 
behavior.


## User stories

- As the creator of a fungible token whose tokenomics require three custom fees with three different collection
accounts, I want my collectors to be able to exchange units of the token without paying custom fees. 
  
## Specification

The network needs to include the new `all_collectors_are_exempt` field in state when it appears in a `CustomFee` 
specification; and when deciding whether to assess a custom fee with `all_collectors_are_exempt = true`, needs to 
check if the potential payer is a collector for the token type of that custom fee.

### Mirror Node

The mirror node is updated to add the new `all_collectors_are_exempt` field to the CustomFee.
The new field is a `boolean` with a default value of `false` and cannot be null.
This information is available via the `/api/v1/tokens/{tokenId}` REST API.
- Example: The other fields have been omitted for brevity
```
{
    "custom_fees":{
        "created_timestamp":"1665581996.952930663",
        "fixed_fees":[
           {
            "amount":20,
            "denominating_token_id":"0.0.48597542",
            "collector_account_id":"0.0.48597559",
            "all_collectors_are_exempt":true
           }
        ]
    }
    ....
}
```

## Backwards Compatibility

This HIP does not propose any breaking changes. All existing custom fees will be unchanged. Any unchanged 
`TokenCreate` operation or `TokenFeeScheduleUpdate` operation will continue to have the same semantics.

## Security Implications

This HIP does not change the precedent importance of securing fee collection accounts.

## How to Teach This

If you don't want your fee collectors to pay a custom fee, create it with `all_collectors_are_exempt = true`.

## Reference Implementation

Please follow [this issue](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/issues/3836) to track progress of 
the reference implementation.

## Rejected Ideas

Because HIP-18 did not stipulate any fee exemptions, and arguably it is surprising for fee collectors to 
_ever_ pay custom fees for their token type, we considered just changing the default behavior to match
this proposal. But we could not rule out the possibility of breaking current users, so opted for a 
backward-compatible approach.

## Open Issues

We do not know of any open concerns with this proposal.

## References
- [HIP-18](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-18)
- [Reference implementation tracker](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/issues/3836)

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
