---
hip: 415
title: Introduction Of Blocks
author: Daniel Ivanov <daniel-k-ivanov95@gmail.com>, Ivan Kavaldzhiev <ivan.kavaldzhiev@limechain.tech>, Steven Sheehy <steven.sheehy@hedera.com>
working-group: Danno Ferrin <@shemnon>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Mitchell Martin <mitch@swirlds.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Core
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Final
release: v0.26.0
created: 2022-03-28
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/434
last-call-date-time: 2022-05-17T07:00:00Z
requires: 435
updated: 2023-02-01
---

## Abstract

Specifies how to introduce and formalize the concepts of Blocks in Hedera Hashgraph so that it can be used as a
foundation on which further interoperability with existing DLT networks and infrastructure can be built.

## Motivation

The concept of blocks is a vital part of the existing Ethereum infrastructure and, as such, the introduction of  a
standard mapping between existing transaction ordering in Hedera and the notion of blocks can be considered a
foundational step towards greater interoperability with EVM based tooling, explorers, exchanges and wallet
providers.

## Rationale

Hedera must have a single consistent answer to what transactions belong to a block and the identifying hash and number
for that block.  This is required for two reasons:

1. The Smart Contracts Service to have the context of a `number` and the `hash` of the current block while running the EVM bytecode.
2. Mirror Nodes to have the information in order to implement standard JSON RPC endpoints and be able to answer queries such as:
    1. Getting current block number
    2. Getting block by hash/number
    3. Getting a list of transactions for a block by number/hash
    4. Getting logs based on block number filtering

**Design Goal #1 Minimize Changes**

The Block concept should fit naturally into the existing processes, mechanisms and state updates. It must keep the same
responsibilities between consensus, services and mirror nodes.

**Design Goal #2 Lightweight**

The Block concept must not add a lot of complexity and performance overhead to the processing of transactions. It must
have minimal impact on the TPS of the network.

Based on the described design goals above, the outlined specification defines that block properties are to be computed
and populated at different points in time and by different components of the network, based on their responsibility.

## Specification

**Definitions**

- `block` → `Record file` containing all `Record Stream Objects` for a given time frame. Block times are to be 
  at least `hedera.recordStream.logPeriod` seconds. The genesis block and therefore number (`blockNumber=0`) is 
  considered the stream start date with the first RCD file exported from `services` nodes.
- `block number` → consecutive number of the `Record file` that is being incremented by `1` for every new `Record 
  file`. For already existing networks, this value will be initially bootstrapped through `Mirror Nodes` and after that 
  maintained by services nodes.
- `block hash` → `32 byte` prefix (out of `48 bytes`) of the running hash of the last `Record Stream Object` from 
  the previous `Record File`
- `block timestamp` → Instant of consensus timestamp of the first `transaction`/`Record Stream Object` in the `Record file`.

### Platform

Adapt `TimestampStreamFileWriter` to include `blockNumber` in the `Record File`. Introduce a new field
`firstConsensusTimeInCurrentFile` to be used as a marker when to start a new Record file. Use the field
`lastConsensusTimestamp` to keep track of the last-seen consensus timestamp that was processed. In this way, we can
ensure that we have at least `1000ns`  difference between the last processed transaction before a new file is created.
The unit of time to be used for those 2 properties is `nanos`. In this way if we have a `parent transaction` with at
least one `child precompile transaction` they all will be included in the same `block`/`Record file`. Otherwise, we 
might have a corner case where a `parent transaction` is included in one block, and its `child precompile transaction` 
falls into the next block since it will increase the `consensus timestamp` with `1ns`. Therefore, the algorithm for 
checking whether to start a new file would be the following:

A new `Record Stream Object` enters `addObject(T object)` in `TimestampStreamFileWriter`. It has a consensus timestamp
`T`. We create a new file only if both (1) and (2) conditions are met:

1. `T - lastConsensusTime > 1000ns`
2. `T - firstConsensusTimeInCurrentFile > 2s`

or

if `lastConsensusTime` or `firstConsensusTimeInCurrentFile` is `null`

### Services

Services are to update the processing logic of transactions so that it supports logic for determining new record file 
periods, incrementing `block` number and keeping `block` relevant data. The proposed solution specifies a `long` field 
to be
used for the block number counter, incremented every `hedera.recordStream.logPeriod` seconds. Using a signed 32-bit int
would result in the block number rolling over in 140 years (if current 2-second length is kept). Sub-second block 
lengths would exhaust that number well within the operational lifetime of typical networks. A signed 64-bit integer
provides a much longer timeframe.

**Pseudo-code of the record streaming algorithm**

```markdown
Properties in State:
- blockHashes `map(number -> keccak256(RunningHash))` - stores the hashes of the last 256 blocks
- blockNumber `long` - stores the current block number
- blockTimestamp - `Instant` - stores the timestamp of the block

handleTransaction() {
	...
	bool `newBlock` = shouldCreateNewBlock() {
			if (`currentTS` - `lastConsensusTime` > `1000ns` && `currentTS` - `blockTimestamp` > `hedera.recordStream.logPeriod`) return `true`; else `false`
	}
	if (`newBlock`) {
			`blockHashes[blockNumber] = keccak256(runningHash)` // `runningHash` is stored in `RecordStreaming`. It is a running hash of the last processed RSO
			delete `blockHashes[blockNumber - 256]`
			`blockNumber++`
			`blockTimestamp = currentTS`
	}
	processTransaction(tx)
	...
}

Migration:
`blockNumber = bootstrapLastBlockNumber`, where `bootstrapLastBlockNumber` is a system property added on startup.
`blockTimestamp = bootstrapLastBlockTimestamp`, where `bootstrapLastBlockTimestamp` is a system property added on startup.
```

`number`, `timestamp` and `hash` (map of the 256 most recent blocks) must be available during transaction execution
since the following opcodes are to be supported as per the EVM specification:

- `BLOCKHASH` → Accepts the block `NUMBER` for which to return the `hash`. Valid range is the last `256` blocks (not including the current one)
- `NUMBER` → Returns the current block number
- `TIMESTAMP` → Returns the unix timestamp of the current block

**Record File**

Once HIP-435 is implemented, record files are to be migrated to protobufs. New `long blockNumber` property is to be 
added in the record stream.

It is required for `services` to propagate this property to `mirror nodes` since there are `partial mirror nodes`,
that don’t keep the full history from the `first record file`. Due to that, they are unable to calculate the
`block number`, thus all other `block properties`. Block `hash` and `timestamp` will not be included in the record files,
since `block hash` is the `32 byte` prefix (out of `48 bytes`) of the running hash of the last `Record Stream 
Object` from the previous `Record File` and `timestamp` is `1st Record Stream Object`'s consensus `timestamp`.

With the introduction of the new version of `Record Stream Object`s, the respective libraries for state proofs must be updated:
- [https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-mirror-node/tree/main/hedera-mirror-rest/check-state-proof](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-mirror-node/tree/main/hedera-mirror-rest/check-state-proof)
- [https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-state-proof-verifier-go](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-state-proof-verifier-go)

### Mirror Nodes

Based on the updates specified above, the record stream objects will pass all the necessary information for mirror nodes
to build `Record files`/`blocks` and store enough data about them to be able to answer all block related queries outlined above. 
To do this they will need to read and store the `number` specified in the `Record file`. For old record files, they will
be derived through a migration process as specified below.

#### Migration

Record files prior to the introduction of the block properties will not expose block information. Mirror
nodes that have a full `testnet` and `mainnet` history will maintain the most recent consensus timestamp
to block number mapping. The values will be retrieved from mirror nodes that have a full history
from stream start. Additionally, a `hedera.mirror.importer.startBlockNumber` property will be added to be able
to customize the block number for new mirror nodes just starting up.

A repeatable database migration would be added to correct historical record files for partial mirror nodes. It
would work as follows:

- Skip if not `testnet` or `mainnet`
- Look up the block in the database associated with the latest hardcoded timestamp for the environment.
- If the row's block number matches then there's nothing to do.
- If the row's block number does not match, calculate the offset and update every row with that offset.

Later, after the block number is included in the record file, the mirror node will dynamically detect the presence of
the first record file with block information and re-run the same migration to adjust historical values.

#### List Blocks REST API

A new list block REST API will be added to support the ability to search for block information. Note it only contains
aggregate information about the blocks. It's expected that users use the returned information like timestamps to query
the transaction or contract results REST APIs for details about the transactions within the block.

```json
{
  "blocks": [{
    "count": 4,
    "gas_limit": 150000000,
    "gas_used": 50000000,
    "hapi_version": "0.24.0",
    "hash": "0xa4ef824cd63a325586bfe1a66396424cd33499f895db2ce2292996e2fc5667a69d83a48f3883f2acab0edfb6bfeb23c4",
    "logs_bloom": "0x549358c4c2e573e02410ef7b5a5ffa5f36dd7398",
    "name": "2022-04-07T16_59_23.159846673Z.rcd",
    "number": 19533336,
    "previous_hash": "0x4fbcefec4d07c60364ac42286d5dd989bc09c57acc7370b46fa8860de4b8721e63a5ed46addf1564e4f8cd7b956a5afa",
    "size": 8489,
    "timestamp": {
      "from": "1649350763.159846673",
      "to": "1649350763.382130000"
    }
  }],
  "links": {
    "next": null
  }
}
```

Note: `gas_limit` won’t be available in initial implementations.

Query parameters:

- `block.number` - The block number. Used as the primary key in pagination. Supports `eq`, `gt`, `gte`, `lt`, `lte` operators.
- `limit` - The maximum number of results to return. Defaults to 25 and max 100 allowed.
- `order` - Sort by the block number. Value of `asc` or `desc`  with a default of `desc`.
- `timestamp` - The consensus timestamp of the last transaction in the block. Supports `eq`, `gt`, `gte`, `lt`, `lte` operators.

#### Get Block REST API

The new mirror node `/api/v1/blocks/{hashOrNumber}` REST API will return the block information associated with a specific 
block. The path parameter will accept either a block hash or block number to uniquely identify a specific block. The block 
hash will accept a 64 or 96 hex-encoded string with a `0x` prefix. The JSON response will be the same as 
`/api/v1/blocks` but without the pagination structure:

```json
{
  "count": 4,
  "gas_limit": 150000000,
  "gas_used": 50000000,
  "hapi_version": "0.24.0",
  "hash": "0xa4ef824cd63a325586bfe1a66396424cd33499f895db2ce2292996e2fc5667a69d83a48f3883f2acab0edfb6bfeb23c4",
  "logs_bloom": "0x549358c4c2e573e02410ef7b5a5ffa5f36dd7398",
  "name": "2022-04-07T16_59_23.159846673Z.rcd",
  "number": 19533336,
  "previous_hash": "0x4fbcefec4d07c60364ac42286d5dd989bc09c57acc7370b46fa8860de4b8721e63a5ed46addf1564e4f8cd7b956a5afa",
  "size": 8489,
  "timestamp": {
    "from": "1649350763.159846673".
    "to": "1649350763.382130000"
  }
}
```

Query parameters: None

Note: `gas_limit` won’t be available in initial implementations.

#### List Contract results REST API

A new `/api/v1/contracts/results` mirror node REST API will be added to be able to search for contract results 
across addresses and blocks. By default, this API will only show transactions that originate from an EOA 
(externally owned accounts). Its JSON response will be identical to `/api/v1/contracts/{id}/results`. The 
contract ID/address will not be supported as a filter option as it is assumed users will use 
`/api/v1/contracts/{id}/results` if that functionality is desired. It will support the following query parameters:

- `block.number` - The block number in base 10 or hex format w/ `0x` prefix. Only `eq` operator is supported.
- `block.hash` - The 32 or 48 byte block hash. With or without optional `0x` prefix. Only `eq` operator is supported.
- `internal` - Whether internal/child transactions should be returned. Defaults to `false`.
- `limit` - The maximum number of results to return. Defaults to 25 and max 100 allowed.
- `order` - Sort by timestamp. Value of `asc` or `desc` with a default of `desc`.
- `timestamp` - The consensus timestamp of the transaction. Supports `eq`, `gt`, `gte`, `lt`, `lte` operators. Primary key for pagination.
- `transaction.index` - The position of the transaction within a block. Requires either `block.number` or `block.hash` to be present. Only `eq` operator is supported.

So that it has parity with the new API, the existing `/api/v1/contracts/{id}/results` will also be updated to add 
the `block.number`, `block.hash`, `internal`, and `transaction.index` query parameters.

### Block Properties

The following table specifies all `block` properties and at which point they will be computed. Mirror nodes must `hex`
encode all properties prior to exposing them through their APIs. This table defines the properties that must be returned
through APIs from Mirror Nodes.

| Property | Computed By | Description  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| number | Services | Stored in services state (only the current number) and exported in the record stream. It is the consecutive number of the record file that is being incremented by 1 for every new record file. The number will be initially set in services through the bootstrapping process. It is exposed to the 1) EVM during Transaction Execution through the NUMBER opcode; 2) as a new property in the record file and ingested by mirror nodes. |
| timestamp | Services | Stored in services state (only the last block timestamp) and computed by services. It is the consensusTimestamp of the first transaction in the record file. It is exposed to the 1) EVM during Transaction Execution through the TIMESTAMP opcode; 2) implicitly exported in the record file through the TS of the first transaction in the record file. |
| hash | Services | Stored in services (last 256 blocks). It is the 32 byte prefix of the runningHash of the previous record file. That is the running hash of the last record stream object from the previous record file. It is exposed to the 1) EVM during Transaction Execution through the BLOCKHASH opcode; 2) In the record file as the End Object Running Hash |
| baseFeePerGas | Relay | Always zero, since there is no EIP-1559 style floating block capacity fees in Hedera. |
  | difficulty | Relay | Hardcoded to hex encoded 0. |
  | extraData | Relay | Hardcoded to 0x. |
  | gasLimit | Mirror Node |  Computed by Mirror Node(s). The gas throttle limit per second multiplied by the target block time. |
  | gasUsed | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). The sum of the gasUsed value for all ContractCall and ContractCreate transactions within the block. |
  | logsBloom | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). It is the bloom filter for the logs within the block. |
  | miner | Relay | Hardcoded to the `0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000` address.  |
  | mixHash | Relay | Hardcoded to 0x. |
  | nonce | Relay | Hardcoded to hex-encoded 0. |
  | parentHash | Mirror Node | The hash of the previous block. |
  | receiptsRoot | Relay | Hardcoded to hex-encoded 0. |
  | sha3Uncles | Relay | Hardcoded to the SHA3 computation of empty array (`0x1dcc4de8dec75d7aab85b567b6ccd41ad312451b948a7413f0a142fd40d49347`). |
  | size | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s). The size of the record file. |
  | stateRoot | Relay | Hardcoded to hex-encoded 0. |
  | totalDifficulty |Relay | Hardcoded to hex-encoded 0. |
  | transactions | Mirror Node | Computed by Mirror Node(s) by ingesting the record stream and aggregating RecordStreamObjects of type ContractCall and ContractCreate within the block. |
  | transactionsRoot | Mirror Node | The same value as block `hash`. |
  | uncles | Relay | Hardcoded to empty array `[]`. |

## Backwards Compatibility

The following breaking changes will be introduced with the implementation of the HIP:

- `BLOCKHASH` will no longer return an empty `hash` but the actual `hash` of the block as per the EVM specification.
- `NUMBER` will no longer return the `timestamp` of the `block`, but rather the proper `block` number as specified in the HIP.

## Security Implications

- The specification does not have any security implications.

## How to Teach this

- Respective documentation will be added.

## Reference Implementation

Initial POC in `services`:

- [https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/commit/04501de76f3e649b3f741dd2453c05e2631e7393#diff-1ca5738f0fe42a25f91d641aea2104dd51bec20398ce6c2aa18afde3d5a590d9R417](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/commit/04501de76f3e649b3f741dd2453c05e2631e7393#diff-1ca5738f0fe42a25f91d641aea2104dd51bec20398ce6c2aa18afde3d5a590d9R417)

## Rejected Ideas

Two iterations have been conducted prior to settling on this approach.

1. Rounds as blocks - the first iteration was proposing that each block is the `consensus round`. It became clear that this approach is not suitable as it implied that multiple blocks are to be issued per second. That would add additional load to infrastructure providers when clients are iterating and going through blocks to query for data.
- Events - the second iteration suggested that `consensus events` are to be defined as `blocks`. The proposal had a much higher cognitive load (1 block = 1 record file is easier to grasp) and it required more changes to the `platform` in order to be implemented. To add on top of that, the same drawback as the `high frequency` blocks was present as well.

## Open Issues

1. Feeding the current values of `contracts.consensusThrottleMaxGasLimit` and `hedera.recordStream.logPeriod` 
   Global Dynamic Properties to Mirror Nodes so that they can compute the `gasLimit` value. The values / gas 
   throttles are available in the network file `0.0.121` but only if they are overriden. In practice Mirror Nodes 
   can update the value for gas/sec (consensusThrottleMaxGasLimit) and block times (log period) however, they do not 
   have a way to feed the current/initial values. Calculating the `gasLimit`:
```markdown
gasLimit = contracts.consensusThrottleMaxGasLimit * hedera.recordStream.logPeriod
```
 

## References

- [Record stream objects](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/blob/main/docs/Record_Event_Stream_File_Formats.docx)
- [Events](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-docs/blob/main/core-concepts/hashgraph-consensus-algorithms/gossip-about-gossip.md)
- [Running hash](https://hedera.com/hh-consensus-service-whitepaper.pdf)
- [EVM opcodes](https://www.evm.codes/)
- [Ethereum Yellow Paper](https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf)

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
