---
hip: 410 
title: Wrapping Ethereum Transaction Bytes in a Hedera Transaction 
author: Danno Ferrin <@shemnon>
type: Standards Track 
category: Core 
needs-council-approval: Yes 
status: Draft
created: 2022-03-28 
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/411
updated: 
---

## Abstract

Add a new transaction type that will hold signed Ethereum transactions and
execute them as Hedera Transactions in a prescribed manner.

## Motivation

The Ethereum Ecosystem has a large and growing collection of tools and libraries
that is becoming a de facto standard and development stack. While there are some
logical mappings to the concepts used in the tooling that custom software can
provide to these tools, the “signed ethereum transaction” is a critical
cornerstone that Hedera does not directly have. This HIP describes how the
Ethereum transaction bodies can be integrated into Hedera in a direct or
meta-transactional way.

## Rationale

### Embedding Ethereum Transaction Directly

The signature in the ethereum transaction is the most critical piece of data,
and must be validated on the exact bytes passed into the signing software.
Attempting to re-constitute the signed bytes or “vouch” for a signature (such as
custodial bridges) introduce categories of software that diminish the value of a
decentralized system.

### A Single Transaction Type

Adding ethereum data to supported transactions adds more complexity to
transactions that need to track multiple modes. Similarly, a parallel series of
transactions increases the API surface in ways that will be hard to maintain.

### A Wrapped “Meta” Transaction

There are critical concepts in Hedera transaction processing, such as paying the
node that posted the transaction and transaction validity windows, that have no
equivalent in ethereum and cannot easily be added to the transaction. Hence,
simply storing the “raw” ethereum transaction would not provide enough
information to process the transaction.

By wrapping the Ethereum transaction in a Hedera transaction those values can be
added as appropriate to the ethereum transaction at the discretion of the
transaction signer. Signing the transaction is also needed to seal in the
choices and ensure they are not mutable.

### Not Repeating Explicit and Implied Values

In order to save transaction space no data that can be read directly from the
RLP (such as the nonce) or that is implied (such as the public key of the
signature) will be stored elsewhere in the Hedera transaction.

## User Stories

As a user I want a way to submit transactions to hedera in the ethereum format
so that end users can use existing tooling from the Ethereum ecosystem.

## Specification

### Protobuf changes

#### Ethereum Transaction

A new transaction body `EthereumTransaction` will be introduced that hold the
ethereum transaction data.

```protobuf
message EthereumTransactionBody {

    // required 
    bytes ethereumData = 1;

    // optional 
    FileID callData = 2; 

}
```

The ethereum transaction data will be converted into a `ByteString`. If the
transaction is small enough it will be the entire unadjusted transaction.

To support larger transactions that won’t fit in the Hedera transaction size
limitations (such as contract create transactions) we will allow the `data`
section of the transaction (also referred to as callData or inputData) to be
stored as a Hedera file. In these instances the transaction body contains an
edited version of the Transaction, replacing a zero length string for the `data`
field in the RLP set in the `ethereumData` message field and storing the call
data in a Hedera File ?? as a hex string ?? as a binary blob ??. When the
transaction is executed and before the signatures are extracted

To support this transaction there will also need to be some changes in other
messages that would be customary for a new transaction body.

```protobuf
// basic_types.proto 
enum HederaFunctionality { 
    //... 
    EthereumTransaction = 83; // enum number may be difference once finalized 
}

// smart_contract_service.proto 
service SmartContractService { 
    //... 
    rpc contractCallEthereum (Transaction) returns (TransactionResponse); 
}

// transaction_body.proto 
message TransactionBody { 
    //... 
    oneof data { 
        //...
        EthereumTransactionBody ethereumTransaction = 50; // field number may change
        //... 
    } 
    //... 
}
```

#### ContractCreateTransaction

In cases where the created contract is small it may fit in a Hedera Transaction.
Ordinarily contract creates always require the creation of a Hedera file. To
simplify this case a new field `initcodeBytes` is added to
the `ContractCreateTransactionBody` as an alternative to `fileID`.

```protobuf
message ContractCreateTransactionBody {
    oneof initcodeSource {
        FileID fileID =    1; 
        bytes initcodeBytes = 7; // field number may change in final draft 
      } 
      // ... 
}
```

### Value of gas price and value fields

For Ethereum Transactions we introduce the concept of “WeiBars”, which are 1 to
10^18th the value of a hBar. This is to maximize compatibility with third party
tools that expect ether units to be operated on in fractions of 10^18, also
known as a Wei. Thus, 1 tinyBar is 10^10 weiBars or 10 gWei. When calculating
gas prices and transferred value the fractional parts below a tiny bar are
dropped when converted to tinyBars.

### Ethereum Requirements

The replay protection specified in EIP-155 will be required for Legacy
transactions. The Type 1 / EIP-2930 and Type 2 / EIP-1559 transactions also
require a chainId field. Non-restricted chainIDs (where chainID is less than or
equal to zero) are not supported.

For all transaction types the chainID specified must match the chainID of the
network as specified in HIP-26 (0x127 for mainnet, 0x128 for testnet, 0x129 for
devnet, and 0x12a for local networks). Future evolution in the Ledger ID may
impact this.

### Transaction Signing Requirements

The sender of an ethereum transaction body will be the account with an account
alias that is an ECDSA(secp256K1) public key. To identify the account the public
key will be recovered from the ethereum transaction, and converted to an
ethereum address. The transaction sender will then be set to the account whose
ethereum address of the alias key has the same ethereum address.

For the purposes of authentication signing the ethereum transaction will provide
the same authorization as though the key signed the entire Hedera transaction.

### Paying for the Transaction

In addition to the account signing the Ethereum transaction (the sender account)
each Hedera transaction containing the Ethereum transaction will also need to be
signed by a hedera account (the relayer account). These may be the same account
or different accounts.

If the relayer and sender account are the same account there are no limitations
on hbar transfers.

When the relayer and sender account is different the following restrictions
apply to hbar transfers.

- The effective gas cost is either the gasUsed field (if a contract call or
  contract create transaction) or the gas that a system contract would charge
  for the operation
- The gas price is either the `gasPrice` field for legacy and type 1 (EIP-2930)
  transactions or the `max_fee_per_gas` field for type 2 (EIP1339 transactions).
  This value is expressed in weibars.
- The sender will be debited hbar equal or less than the gas price multiplied by
  the effective gas cost (the sender portion).
- If the sender portion is greater than the total fees the relayer will receive
  the excess or the sender portion should be reduced. If the sender portion is
  less than the total fees the sender will pay the difference.
- If there is a `max_priority_fee_per_gas` specified then the relayers account
  cannot receive more than the effective gas cost times
  the `max_priority_fee_per_gas` (in weibars). The sender portion should be
  reduced until the transfers balance out. The relayer may still spend any
  amount needed to balance out the transfers.

Finally, if an ethereum transaction reaches consensus and is invalid and cannot
be processed (for critical failures such as a bad ECDSA signature, an account
not matching the sender, an invalid ethereum transaction, an incorrect nonce, or
any other such error) the relayer is responsible for all fees relating to
bringing the transaction to consensus.

### Account Nonce

Ethereum transactions have a different deconfliction and transaction enablement
mechanism than Hedera, but it is an inseparable part of ethereum toolchains. To
that end we will support transaction sequence numbers as an additional
transaction validity check.

Each Hedera account will track a new value `ethereumNonce`, defaulting to zero.

When an `EthereumTransaction` is validated at consensus time the transaction
will fail if the account's `ethereumNonce` is not equal to the nonce in the
ethereum transaction bytes.

If the transaction passes all validations and EVM execution (or equivalent
processing) starts then the `ethereumNonce` in the user account is incremented
by one. If the transaction fails for any reason prior to EVM execution the nonce
is not incremented.

### Executing the Transaction

Ethereum transactions can have a number of possible handling routes. All of them
are driven by the `to` field in the ethereum transaction.

If the `to` field is empty, zero length, or all zeros it will be converted into
a `ContractCreate` transaction. If the transaction has a `callData` value in the
transaction it will be places din the `ContractCreate`s `fileID` field,
otherwise the data goes in the `initcodeBytes` field.

For non-zero non-empty `to` fields the address will first be decoded as a
standard solidity mapping (bytes 1-4 are shard, bytes 5-12 are realm, bytes
13-20 are id, big endian encoded). If this does not map to an exiting entity
then the `to` address will be processed as an alias, which currently can map to
Crypto Accounts and Smart Contract Accounts. 

If the `to` field still does not map to an entity the transaction fails with a
hedera error. Intrinsic gas will be charged to the sender account.

If the `to` address points to a Contract account the body of the ethereum
transaction will be converted into a `ContractCall` and executed.

If the `to` address corresponds to a Token ID the call will initially be handled
as an EVM, and converted into a `ContractCall`. In future updates it will be
handled directly via the HTS Precompile code skipping the EVM step.

If the `to` address points to a Topic ID or File ID the call will be handled as
an EVM, and converted into a `ContractCall`. If precompile support for the
consensus and file service is developed then there may be similar handling as
token calls.

## Backwards Compatibility

This HIP introduces a new transaction type, and does not directly impact other
transactions. This HIP does increase the amount of call paths that depend on
particular behavior of the smart contract and HTS precompile, however the impact
is expected to increase the fidelity and consistency of actions. Part of this
will be ensured by reusing all the transition logic from dependant transactions.

## Security Implications

The Ethereum Transaction will change some validation logic for authorization of
actions. Instead of requiring signatures just at the hedera transaction level
the body of the Ethereum transaction will contain a signature that will
authorize actions within the scope of the transaction (value transfer and
contract/precompile calls). Security logic will need to be altered to also check
ethereum transaction data for authorization. Because security logic in hedera is
to default to Deny any implementation errors will be expected to prevent
legitimate actions and not enable illegitimate actions.

## How to Teach This

This is not a transaction dApps and integration software will typically use
unless they specifically need Ethereum style transactions. Typical apps using
this would be apps bridging JSON-RPC calls or apps integrating with other
ethereum tooling as a downstream consumer.

The documentation for this transaction should emphasize that normal HAPI APIs
provide greater control and functionality than the functionality exposed via
Ethereum transactions. If the application has control over the key signing
functionality this transaction should be avoided.

## Reference Implementation

An incomplete prototype implementation is
at [https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/tree/rlp](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/tree/rlp)
. A production version will follow.

## Rejected Ideas

### Foreign Transaction Data

An internal prototype piloted the idea of adding foreign transaction data to all
possible transactions, and then populating a normal hedera transaction with the
data from the foreign bytes. Transition logic would need to be updated to either
validate the data matches the foreign bytes or to reject any transaction with
foreign data.

This was rejected because it introduced a large amount of data duplication.
Parsing of RLP data is very quick in comparison to other cryptographic
validations and the weight on the record stream was deemed too much.

### Enhanced Transaction Types

An idea that was workshoped was to create separate 'Ethereum' variants of each
of the transaction types, populating each with the ethereum transaction and
doing similar field copying semantics.

This idea was rejected because the explosion in number of transaction types was
deemed a risk to software maintenance.

### Storing just the Ethereum Transaction

There was brief discussion on the idea of storing the Ethereum transaction
without any Hedera wrappers, and having the transaction execution logic detect
the transaction and handle it directly.

This was rejected because of the inability to deconflict and deduplicate
transactions in the manner that is required for the Hedera network structure.
The node also was unable to be identified for proper credit in bringing the
transaction to consensus.

## Open Issues

none at the moment

## References

- [EIP-155](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-155) - Simple replay attack protection
- [EIP-2930](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2930) - Optional access lists
- [EIP-1559](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1559) - Fee market change for ETH 1.0 chain
- [Ethereum Yellow Paper](https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf)
- [HIP-26](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-26) - Migrate Smart Contract Service EVM to Hyperledger Besu EVM
- [HIP-32](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-21) - Auto Account Creation
- [HIP-206](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-206) - Hedera Token Service Precompiled Contract for Hedera SmartContract Service

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
