---
hip: 1084
title: Zero Cost EthereumTransaction on Success
author: Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>, Richard Bair <@rbair>
working-group: Richard Bair <@rbair>, Atul Mahamuni <@atul-hedera>, Stanimir Stoyanov <stanimir.stoyanov@limechain.tech>
requested-by: Relay Operators
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Hedera Accepted
last-call-date-time: 2025-01-29T07:00:00Z
created: 2024-11-20
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/1083
updated: 2025-01-29
requires: 410
---

## Abstract

Updates the rules for charging fees for EthereumTransactions, so that the payer of an `EthereumTransaction` will only
incur a fee if the transaction fails due diligence checks.

## Motivation

Today, relay operators must pay the `EthereumTransaction` HAPI fee for every transaction they submit on behalf of an
Externally Owned Account (EOA). Currently, for every simple `EthereumTransaction`, this fee is the hbar equivalent of
$0.0001, based on the exchange rate. Although this fee is very low, it effectively compels relay operators on Hedera
to adopt a non-standard business model to cover these costs, which are then passed on to the users. Users are also
burdened with understanding this more complex business model, which negatively impacts their experience.

This situation acts as a friction point for EOAs looking to access cost-effective relay operators on the Hedera public
network.

## Rationale

On Ethereum, all execution costs are paid for by the 'sender' who created, signed, and submitted the transaction.
Hedera follows a similar approach for `ContractCallTransaction`s. However, Hedera charges an additional fee for
each `EthereumTransaction` submitted via JSON-RPC relays. This fee serves as a defense against a malicious
JSON-RPC relay that might send malformed transactions to the network, where there would be no one to pay for
the processing of those transactions.
This fee is unnecessary for successful transactions since the intrinsic gas fee covers the base costs (gossip &
consensus). Therefore, this HIP proposes that the fee for submitting `EthereumTransactions` to the network
should only be charged if the JSON-RPC relay submits a transaction that fails due diligence checks, such that the
EOA cannot be charged for the overhead of gossip and consensus.

## User stories

1. As a relay operator, I want to submit an `EthereumTransaction` on behalf of an EOA without paying additional fees.
2. As a node operator, I want to charge relays that submit transactions that cannot be charged to the EOA.
3. As a user, I want to use the same pricing structure and have the same user experience for Hedera relays as with other
   networks.
  
## Specification

Definitions:
 - `evm tx`: The RLP encoded transaction bytes defined by the Ethereum yellow paper that form a standard Ethereum transaction
 - `relay`: A system that, given an `evm tx`, wraps it in an HAPI `EthereumTransaction` and submits it to Hedera.
            This is also the `payer` for the `EthereumTransaction`. See
            [TransactionBody.transactionID](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/blob/main/services/transaction_body.proto#L104)
 - `EOA`: The account that created and signed the `evm tx` and submitted it to a `relay`. This is the `from` in the
          [Ethereum Transaction Schema](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-apis/blob/main/src/eth/transaction.yaml)
          often noted as (tx.from)

### Smart Contract Creation and Execution Transactions

The `relay` will **only** be charged if handling of the `EthereumTransaction` fails **before** any bytecodes are executed.
In other words, the `relay` is charged when one of the pre-requisite checks for `EthereumTransaction` fails, regardless of
the execution status of the transaction itself once it begins smart contract creation or execution in the EVM.

Examples:
 - The `relay` is charged if the `evm tx` cannot be parsed or is otherwise malformed
 - The `relay` is charged if the `EOA` specified in the `evm tx` refers to a non-existent account
 - The `relay` is charged if the `evm tx` was not properly signed by the keys of the `EOA`
 - The `relay` is charged if the `EOA` has insufficient funds to pay the intrinsic gas fee
 - The `relay` is charged if the `nonce` check fails
 - The `relay` is not charged if the contract is called but concludes with an error code 
 - The `relay` is not charged if the contract is called and concludes without error

In summary the `relay` account is not charged if the `EthereumTransaction` transaction completes in a 
`CONTRACT_REVERT_EXECUTED` or `SUCCESS` HAPI response code, all other responses codes will result in a charge to the
relay account.

 ### Regular Transactions

A "regular transaction" is a simple HBAR crypto transfer between two accounts. The `relay` will be charged for **any**
failure of the transaction. This is required to maintain compatibility with the semantics in Ethereum, where a regular
transaction will not be included in a block or executed if it will not succeed.

Example:
- The `relay` is charged if the `evm tx` cannot be parsed or is otherwise malformed
- The `relay` is charged if the `EOA` specified in the `evm tx` refers to a non-existent account
- The `relay` is charged if the `evm tx` was not properly signed by the keys of the `EOA`
- The `relay` is charged if the `EOA` has insufficient funds to pay the intrinsic gas fee **and** the transfer
- The `relay` is charged if the receiver has `receiverSigRequired` enabled
- The `relay` is charged if the receiver doesn't exist, must be auto-created, and the `EOA` has insufficient funds to
    pay for the account creation
- The `relay` is charged if the `nonce` check fails

In summary the `relay` account is not charged if the `EthereumTransaction` transaction completes in a `SUCCESS`
HAPI response code, all other response codes will result in a charge to the `relay` account.

## Backwards Compatibility

No changes to transaction execution or record stream externalization is made in this HIP.
`EthereumTransaction` will continue to work and will only see a reduction in cost on success or contract revert cases.

## Security Implications

No changes in security.

## References

- [EthereumTransaction protobuf specification](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/blob/main/services/ethereum_transaction.proto)
- [Hedera JSON RPC Relay](https://docs.hedera.com/hedera/core-concepts/smart-contracts/json-rpc-relay)
- [HIP 410](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-410)

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or 
(https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
