---
hip: 185
title: Smart Contract Service Gas Based Throttling
author: Danno Ferrin <danno.ferrin@hedera.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Service
status: Last Call
needs-council-approval: Yes
created: 2021-10-27
last-call-date-time: 2021-11-17T07:00:00Z
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/192
requires: 25, 26
---

## Abstract

Changes transaction throttling for Smart Contracts to be based on gas usage and
reservations instead of transactions per second.

## Motivation

Currently, the Smart Contract Service throttling is based on limitations, which
are driven by the architecture used to query the smart contracts from the
backing store. With the adoption of On-disk Virtual Merkle
Tries [HIP-25](./hip-25.md) the limiting factor for smart contract execution
quickly becomes compute constrained. To accurately reflect that constraint in
the throttling process the unit of throttle should be EVM gas consumption, which
is mostly a measure of compute expenditure.

## Rationale

### Gas Per Second Throttling

Most Ethereum based blockchains place a limit on the amount of gas per block
that transactions can consume. This is done to place a limit on the amount of
time spent in block validation so that the miner nodes can more quickly produce
new nodes. While Hedera does not have blocks in the context of how a Nakamoto
consensus system would use it we are constrained by the physics of time as to
how many blocks we can process.

For transactions Gas is a better measure of the complexity of the transaction
than counting all transactions the same, so metering the limits on Gas provides
a more reasonable limit on resource consumption.

To allow for more flexibility in what transactions we accept and to mirror
Ethereum Mainnet behavior the transactions limits will be calculated on a
per-gas basis for smart contract calls (`ContractCreate`, `ContractCall`
, `ContractCallLocalQuery`) in addition to a per-transaction limit. It is
expected that the gas limits will be hit more consistently than the transaction
counts if the latter is raised high enough.

### Gas Reservation and Unused Gas Refund

Hedera throttles at two locations: prior to consensus nodes limit the number of
transactions they submit to the network. Then at consensus time if the maximum
number of transactions is exceeded the excess transactions are not evaluated and
are cancelled with a busy state. Throttling by variable gas amounts provides
some challenges to this system, where the nodes only submit a share of their
transaction limit.

To address this throttling will be based on two different gas measures at pre
consensus and post consensus. Pre-consensus throttling will use the `gasLimit`
to measure the throttle, and consensus time throttling will use the actual
evaluated transaction gas limit. It is impossible to know the actual evaluated
gas pre-consensus because network state can directly impact the flow of the
transaction, which is why pre-consensus uses the `gasLimit` field and will be
referred to as the gas reservation.

`ContractCallLocalQuery` requests are not submitted to consensus and are only
executed on the node receiving the message. Hence, they will only count against
the local node's precheck throttle. `ContractCreate` and `ContractCall`
transactions are executed in consensus and count against both precheck throttle
limits and consensus throttle limits. The throttle limits for precheck and
consensus may be set to different values.

In order to ensure that the transactions can execute properly it is common to
set a higher gas reservation than will be consumed by execution. In Ethereum
Mainnet the entire reservation is charged to the account prior to execution and
then unused portion of the reservation is credited back. Ethereum Mainnet,
however, utilizes a memory pool and does transaction ordering at block
production time, and that allows the block limit to be based only on used gas
and not reserved gas.

In order to prevent over-reservation of the smart contract services the gas
credited back relative to the reservation will be limited to at most 20% of the
reservation amount. From a different perspective the minimum amount of gas
charged to a user based on the reservation will be a minimum of 80% of the
reservation. This will incentivize transaction submitters to get within 25% of
the actual gas used inorder to not be charged for unused reservation.

### Maximum Gas per Transaction

Because consensus time execution is now limited by actual gas used and not based
on a transaction count it is now safe to raise the limit of gas available to
each transaction. Prior to gas based metering it would be possible for each
transaction to consume the maximum gas per transaction without regard to the
other transactions, so limits were based on this worst case scenario. Now that
throttling is the aggregate gas used we can allow each transaction to consume
large amounts of gas without concern for an extreme surge.

When a transaction is submitted to a node with a `gasLimit` that is greater than
the per-transaction gas limit the transaction must be rejected during precheck
with a response code of `INDIVIDUAL_TX_GAS_LIMIT_EXCEEDED`. The transaction must
not be submitted to consensus.

<!-- todo propose a number and justify why.  Deploying a 24Kib Contract requires 6,533,640 gas minimum with London deposit costs. -->

## User stories

As a transaction submitter, I want the capacity of the Hedera Smart Contract
Service to scale with the amount of work done as measured by Gas instead of
transaction count so that I can submit larger and more compute intensive
transactions while preserving the ability to send many smaller transactions with
the same load imposed on processing nodes.

## Specification

### Transactions per second Throttle

The current transaction per second throttle will be raised from the current
levels. Nodes will need to ensure both the existing transaction per second
throttle (which is shared among nodes) and the new gas per second throttle are
not violated when submitting transactions to consensus (which is calculated
per-node).

### Gas Per Second Throttling at Pre-Check

Each individual node will use the `gasLimit` field to throttle `ContractCreate`
, `ContractCall` and `ContractCallLocalQuery` to calculate the amount of gas
that is being reserved. Each node will ensure that submitted transactions by
that node do not reserve more gas than the global gas per second throttle.

### Gas Per Second Throttling at Transaction execution

At transaction execution time the actual gas used by the submitted transactions
will be used to determine the throttle, subject to gas minimums charged by the
gas reservation refund.

If a transaction's gas reservation exceeds the amount of gas left before
throttling occurs then the transaction will be canceled with
a `CONSENSUS_GAS_EXHAUSTED` response. This will be evaluated as the transactions
are evaluated in-order, so if a consensus transaction with a lower gas limit
follows that is less than the remaining throttle amount then that transaction
will not be cancelled and will be executed.

### Charging for reserved but unused Gas

If a transaction uses less than 80% of the gas reserved via the `gasLimit` field
then the transaction will be charged 80% of the `gasLimit`. If the amount of gas
used is equal to or greater than 80% the gas reserved via the `gasLimit` field
then only the actual gas used will be charged.

Gas that is reserved but not charged does not count against the throttling
limit.

### Charging for Intrinsic and Contract Creation Gas

Because we are throttling by Gas used it is now appropriate to re-introduce
Ethereum Mainnet intrinsic and gas creation charges. Transactions will be
charged the current base fee (of 21,000 gas) and the Istanbul rates for
transaction payload (4 for zero bytes, 16 for non-zero bytes) passed into the
EVM. This will help ensure that the computational capacity is not exceeded with
numerous small transactions.

## Backwards Compatibility

This HIP introduces a new throttling mechanism and changes to the EVM gas
schedule that are enabled by the new mechanism. No changes are introduced into
the EVM semantics. It is expected that the capacity for smart contract
transactions in all measures are increased, hence only usages that depend on
current low level of throttling will be impacted. No contracts are known that
depend on capacity limitations at this time.

## Security Implications

The increase in the execution of smart contracts may increase load on the
consensus nodes in the Hedera network. The limits used were calculated to not
increase these loads beyond the levels that the current hardware can handle.

## How to Teach This

Any documentation or tutorials that address transaction throttling or speed
limits will need to be updated to reflect the new gas-based throttling.

## Reference Implementation

- Hedera
  Services [PR#2373](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/pull/2373/)

## Rejected Ideas

- Transaction per second only throttling was rejected because increasing the
  limit would need to take into account the security of all transactions
  consuming all the available gas with expensive operations.

## Open Issues

## References

- [HIP-25](./hip-25.md) On-disk Virtual Merkle Tree
- [HIP-26](./hip-26.md) Migrate Smart Contract Service EVM to Hyperledger Besu
  EVM

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
