---
hip: 945
title: Improvements to Hedera DID Method
author: Keith Kowal <keith.kowal@swirldslabs.com>
working-group: Keith Kowal <keith.kowal@swirldslabs.com>, Derek Munneke <derek.munneke@meeco.me>
requested-by: keith.kowal@swirldslabs.com
type: Standards Track
category: Application
needs-council-approval: No
status: Last Call
last-call-date-time: 2024-06-06T07:00:00Z
created: 2024-04-01
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/did-method/pull/4
requires: 27
updated: 2024-04-22
---

## Abstract

This HIP describes additional features building on [HIP-27](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-27)
The main feature addition allows DID documents to be anchored on IPFS and enables the lookup of a DID document from IPFS via a CID reference in the DID Document HCS message(s).

## Motivation

Additional functionality to improve the utility of the DID:Hedera method for the community.

## Rationale

The primary added feature is the ability of the DID:Hedera method to create a DID referencing a DID document that is anchored on IPFS via a CID reference. The method also then enables the lookup of a DID document from IPFS from the CID reference. 

The addition of this capability to HIP-27 supports alignment with the [Guardian](https://hedera.com/guardian) approach to creating DIDs.

## User stories

As a user I want to create a DID:Hedera identity where the DID document is anchored on IPFS.

As an identity verifier I want to lookup with the DID document that is anchored on IPFS for verification of a received identity object.
  
## Specification

The following additions were made to the updated DID:Hedera method.

### DID Document

A Hedera DID MAY be created by creating a reference to a DID document available in [IPFS](https://ipfs.io/).

`DIDDocument` event value must have a JSON structure defined by a [DIDDocument-schema](DIDDocument.schema.json) and contains the following properties:

- `DIDDocument` - The DIDOwner event with the following attributes:
  - `id` - The DID id
  - `type` - The document type, MAY include the DID document serialisation representation.
  - `cid` - The Content Identifiers to point to DID document in IPFS.
  - `url` - A URL to the IPFS document MAY be included for convenience.

```json
{
  "DIDDocument": {
    "id": "did:hedera:testnet:z6MknSnvSESWvijDEysG1wHGnaiZSLSkQEXMECWvXWnd1uaJ_0.0.1723780",
    "type": "DIDDocument",
    "cid": "bafybeifn6wwfs355md56nhwaklgr2uvuoknnjobh2d2suzsdv6zpoxajfa/did-document.json",
    "url": "https://ipfs.io/ipfs/bafybeifn6wwfs355md56nhwaklgr2uvuoknnjobh2d2suzsdv6zpoxajfa/did-document.json"
  }
}
```
## Updates to CRUD Operations

### Read
Read, or Resolve, occurs by reading messages from the HCS topic set in the `did-topic-id` element of the DID namestring, and processing messages as below:

1. If the most recent valid message has `operation` set to `delete`, the DID document returned MUST be empty.
**2. If the most recent valid message has `operation` set to `create`, and event object is `DIDDocument`, the DID document returned is the document resolve from the IPFS CID reference.**
3. Otherwise
   1. Read valid message until one has `operation` set to `create`, and event object is `DIDOwner`.
   2. Construct DID document by applying message `update` and `revoke` operations in order.
   3. Return constructed DID document.

## Backwards Compatibility

These changes are part of the updates to the DID:Hedera method and not backwards compatible with previous DID:Hedera method versions. 

## Security Implications

Individual implementers of the DID:Hedera method can decide if they wish to anchor DID documents on IPFS vs messages on Hedera Consensus Service. As part of this evaluation users should have a comprehensive understanding of IPFS, its security weaknesses, and the fact that documents on IPFS are not permanant.

## How to Teach This

Documentation for updated DID Method.

## Reference Implementation

The implementation for this functionality can be found in the updated DID:Hedera method

## References

[DID:Hedera method](https://github.com/hashgraph/did-method/blob/master/did-method-specification.md)

[HIP 27](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-27)

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
