---
hip: 980
title: Enhance mirror node entity rest APIs with timestamp query parameter
author: Ivan Kavaldzhiev <ivan.kavaldzhiev@limechain.tech>
working-group: Steven Sheehy <@steven-sheehy>, Nana Essilfie-Conduah <nana@swirldslabs.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Mirror
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Accepted
last-call-date-time: 2024-07-23T07:00:00Z
created: 2024-06-03
requested-by: Solo Labs
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/981
updated: 2024-10-09
---

## Abstract

This HIP enhances part of the mirror node REST APIs to support querying by timestamp. This will allow users to query for
the historical state of any entity info on the network that currently misses this functionality.

## Motivation

To enhance user experience and allow users or developers to query the state of an entity at a specific point in time we
will add a timestamp query parameter to all of the entity-based REST APIs that currently don't have one.

## Rationale

Users may want to run historical transactions on a local mirror node instance using public state data. To make this
possible, some of the existing REST APIs should be enhanced with a timestamp query parameter, so that historical public
data can be fetched and used
for the simulations.

## User stories

- As a user of mirror node, I want to be able to query for the historical state of nfts.
- As a user of mirror node, I want to be able to query for the historical state of token relationships for an account.
- As a user of mirror node, I want to be able to query for the historical state of allowances for an account.

## Specification

The proposed enhancement involves adding a query parameter `timestamp` to the existing routes:

- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/tokens` to return correct historical information about an account and their
  associated fungible tokens for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/nfts` to return correct historical information about an account and their
  associated nfts for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/crypto` to return correct historical information about an
  account's crypto allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/nfts` to return correct historical information about an account's
  NFT allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/tokens` to return correct historical information about an
  account's token allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/tokens/{tokenId}/nfts/{serialNumber}` to return correct historical information about an NFT for a specific
  timestamp

**Timestamp Query Parameter**

A new `timestamp` query parameter will be added to search for all entities and entity related information that are
missing its support. It will be with the format of `array[string]`.
This query parameter will represent a single or multiple consensus timestamps in a Unix format in `seconds.nanoseconds`
format and will have an optional comparison operator.
That is, it will search for results that are `equal`, `greater` or `less` than the timestamp itself or its seconds
component.

The exact names of the operators will be `eq`, `gt`, `gte`, `lt` and `lte`. The user doesn't need to know the exact
timestamp at which an entity was created or updated for it to function. The API will return the results that match the
timestamp or the closest one to it.
For example, if we have an `asc` ordering of the results, then `?timestamp=X`, `timestamp=eq:X`, or `timestamp=lte:X`
will have the same behaviour and vice versa, where `X` is the desired timestamp.

The `timestamp` query parameter will support having a range of timestamps. For example, `timestamp=gt:X&timestamp=lt:Y`
will return a single result with the entity or entity related info in the most recent state within the range that is
greater than `X` and less than `Y`, where `X` and `Y` are different timestamps.

Here are the affected APIs with the query parameter added:

```
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/tokens?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/nfts?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/crypto?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/nfts?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/tokens?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/tokens/{tokenId}/nfts/{serialNumber}?timestamp={value}
```

Note: There is an existing API with a `timestamp` query parameter, which is
`/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}?timestamp={value}`. While parameter changes won't be applied for it, it's
behaviour will reflect to actually return modification changes of all account fields. Currently, the timestamp filter is
applied only to the transaction list. The balance info section will continue to have granularity of 15 minutes.

**Request**

```
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/tokens?timestamp={value}
```

**Example Request**

```
GET api/v1/accounts/4408244/tokens?order=asc&timestamp=lte:1725334849.603493001
```

Note that the following two requests will return the same response as the query above:

```
GET api/v1/accounts/4408244/tokens?order=asc&timestamp=1705334449.803393003
GET api/v1/accounts/4408244/tokens?order=asc&timestamp=eq:1705334449.803393003
```

**Response**

The response format of all the mentioned APIs will be enhanced with additional timestamp range with `from` and `to`
fields, reflecting the period in which the returned data state was valid. The `to` field will be null if the result
represent the latest updated state.

```json
{
  "tokens": [
    {
      "automatic_association": true,
      "balance": 1,
      "created_timestamp": "1705334449.803393003",
      "decimals": 0,
      "token_id": "0.0.4328145",
      "freeze_status": "NOT_APPLICABLE",
      "kyc_status": "NOT_APPLICABLE",
      "timestamp": {
        "from": "1705334449.803393003",
        "to": null
      }
    }
  ],
  "links": {
    "next": null
  }
}
```

## **Backwards Compatibility**

The change is backwards compatible as it is simply adding a query parameter to an existing route. The data required to
filter by timestamp is already stored in the mirror node.

If a timestamp query parameter is not provided, the API will use the latest state of the entity as it does currently.

## Security Implications

Historical timestamp filtering can slow down some of the queries, especially if the timestamp is not indexed or the data
set is very large.

## Rejected Ideas

Initially, the HIP aimed to allow the grounding steps for supporting shadow fork on a local mirror node. This means
users could run a local instance of the mirror node
and use a public state of the network, including historical one. However, this idea was rejected, since the
implementation of this feature would have meant having
a lot of REST API requests against the public mirror nodes, which would have generated a heavy load on the network.
Additionally, it would have been impractical
for many users accustomed to rely on a public service, having this functionality (e.g. call eth_call or
eth_debugTraceTransaction with a specific block number against a
public service, which may be paid), to spend additional efforts of spinning their own local mirror node and sending
their call against it.

As a summary, this idea was rejected in favour of a public mirror node provider to allow this functionality as a
service.

## References

https://mainnet-public.mirrornode.hedera.com/api/v1/docs/

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](https://www.notion.so/LICENSE)
or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
