---
hip: 1037
title: Protocol Buffer API Specification
author: Joseph Sinclair <@jsync-swirlds>
requested-by: Richard Bair <@rbair>
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-tsc-approval: Yes
status: Accepted
created: 2024-08-09
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/1037
updated: 2024-01-17
---

## Abstract
The current protocol buffer API definitions are technically correct, but lack
usable or useful specification. We should add, in comments compatible with
protoc-gen-doc, specification text that clearly states both requirement and
expectation for every message, file, and field. This documentation should be
automatically transformed to markdown documentation that is published to the
Hedera API site. In the ideal case this specification will be sufficient for
any qualified team to implement a completely independent consensus node that
is fully interoperable with the current consensus node software.

## Motivation
The existing protocol buffer API documentation is brief, entirely descriptive,
and often inaccurate. This produces two negative consequences. First, it is not
possible to produce a compatible independent implementation of the Hedera
consensus node software without extensive reference to the existing source
code. Second, developers are often unclear how best to interact with the
Hedera API, and independent SDK developers, in particular, may struggle to
correctly implement these API calls.

As part of expanding the Hedera ecosystem we MUST reduce the difficulty and
hurdles for independent developers when building systems that interact with
the Hedera network. Clear and accurate API specifications are one element
required to accomplish this goal.

## Rationale
This HIP improves the developer experience and enhances decentralization by
making it easier to design distributed applications or alternative
implementations of core network systems.

The use of a markdown format that is automatically generated from the
functional protocol buffer definition files encourages more frequent updates
that are more closely tied to the functional updates to the API documents, and
reduces the inevitable "drift" between functional API and API specification.

## User stories
- As a dApp developer I want to have clear and accurate specification for all
  Hedera APIs so that I can confidently design my application to call those
  APIs.
- As an independent implementor I want to have clear and accurate specification
  for all Hedera APIs so that I can design an independent, correct, and
  compatible implementation of Hedera network nodes, including a consensus node.
- As an Hedera software contributor I want to have clear and accurate
  specification for all Hedera APIs so that I can confidently implement changes
  to Hedera-led software.
- As a dApp developer that receives bytes or is expected to parse, produce, or
  process bytes representing a HAPI protobuf message I want to have a clear
  specification of the structure and implications of the corresponding proto
  messages to understand how to correctly parse them.

## Specification
The core of this HIP is
[the guidelines](../assets/hip-1037/Specification-Format-Style-Guidelines.md)
recommended for this, and all future Hedera protocol buffer specifications.
This HIP, however, also implements sweeping changes to specification text for
the existing API documents. These changes affect over 20,000 lines of text
across almost 150 files in order to add full specification text that complies
with the guidelines expressed in this improvement proposal. The full reference
implementation, therefore, is only linked here for brevity and clarity.<br/>
The implementation of this HIP is detailed in github as a
pull request linked [later in this document](#reference-implementation).

## Backwards Compatibility
This HIP does not change any functional characteristic, and documents the
state of the API as-is.  This does not introduce any change in compatibility.

## Security Implications
This HIP updates and clarifies specification and expectation for the Hedera
API. This does not materially impact the security of the system.

## How to Teach This
The Hedera API is a critical component of the design and interaction for the
Hedera ecosystem. Improvements to the formality and completeness of the API
specification help everyone involved to develop distributed applications
more quickly and with greater confidence.

## Reference Implementation
We have a
[pull request](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/pull/388)
that implements these guidelines across the full hedera-protobufs repository.

## Rejected Ideas
1. Use of a highly formal "language" for specification
   * This was deemed excessive.  Protocol Buffers are already a highly formal
     language, and adding specification as markdown comments, using the 
     light weight RFC/HIP language is sufficient while remaining approachable
     for the largest practical number of community members.
1. Addition of specialized "tag" elements to specification comments.
   * This would have required building a complete custom documentation
     processor and would have been non-standard.  Rather than do so we chose
     to adhere closely to existing standard approaches for protocol buffers.


## Open Issues
None.

## References
- Protocol Buffer Document Generator
  [protoc-gen-doc](https://github.com/pseudomuto/protoc-gen-doc/?tab=readme-ov-file#protoc-gen-doc).

## Copyright/license
This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)

