---
hip: 342
title: Streamline contract creation in SDKs
author: Greg Scullard (@gregscullard), @wensheng
type: Application
category: SDK
needs-council-approval: no
status: Draft
last-call-date-time:
created: 2021-01-24
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/246
---

## Abstract

This HIP proposes a simpler way of deploying smart contracts using the SDKs.

## Motivation

The current smart contract deployment flow calls for developers to first create a file on the Hedera network, optionally as a set of transactions to append data to the file if the contract's bytecode is large. Once the file is created, the developer can deploy the contract with another API call.

It would be easier if all these steps were wrapped into a single SDK method.

## Rationale

Improving the developer experience with a more "natural" contract deployment flow that abstracts the steps required to do so.

## User stories

As a developer, I want to be able to deploy my smart contract from bytecode as a single SDK operation.

As a developer, I want to be able to optionally set constructor parameters when deploying my contract as a single SDK operation.

As a developer, I want to see an example of this deployment flow in the SDKs examples.

As a developer, I want to be able to consult documentation on this new deployment flow.

## Specification

In Java

```java
public final class ContractCreateTransaction extends Transaction<ContractCreateTransaction> {
  /**
   * Sets the contract's bytecode
   * <p>
   * A file containing the bytecode will automatically be created
   * and will be used during contract creation
   * <p>
   * The bytecode must be the ASCII hexadecimal representation of the smart contract bytecode.
   *
   * @param bytecode The Bytecode
   * @return {@code this}
   */
  public ContractCreateTransaction setBytecode(String bytecode) {
    Objects.requireNonNull(bytecode);
    // throw exception if `bytecodeFileId` is already set (can't have both)
    // add exception to setBytecodeFileId to do the opposite
    requireNotFrozen();
    this.bytecode = bytecode;
    return this;
  }
}
```

The `.execute` method should
* Create file (with admin key for append if necessary) from bytecode
* Append n times to complete bytecode upload
* Create the contract
* Upon querying for a receipt or record for the operation, the contractId should be returned.

## Backwards Compatibility

This HIP implements new SDK methods and therefore has no backwards compatibility issues.

## Security Implications

This HIP does not propose any new functionality that would create security implications.

## How to Teach This

An SDK example and documentation updates

## Reference Implementation

TBD

## Rejected Ideas

Changing the Hedera Services layer to support larger file sizes (large bytecode support) or one step Hedera API to upload and deploy smart contracts.

## Open Issues

https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-sdk-java/issues/839
https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-sdk-go/issues/364
https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-sdk-js/issues/850

## References

None

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
