---
hip: 680
title: Enable supply key to adapt metadata of an NFT in the treasury wallet
author: Patches (@HGraphPunks)
working-group: Adrian Marin (@AdriMsM91), Ashe Oro (@Ashe-Oro), Michael Garber (@mgarbs)
type: Standards Track
category: Core
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Draft
last-call-date-time: null
created: 2023-02-16
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/660
updated: 2023-02-16
---

## Abstract

Currently, there is no native way to update the metadata of a non-fungible token (NFT) on the Hedera network. This HIP proposes the extension of the SUPPLY key that will allow updating NFT metadata of NFTs in the treasury wallet. This will provide the Hedera network with enhanced abilities to create dynamic NFTs that are gaurenteed immutable outside of the treasury wallet, and mutable inside the treausry wallet. 

## Motivation

Though other methods can be used like burning and reminting a NFT, this is suboptimal for a lot of use cases where serial number corresponds to data / imagery and loses the ability to see adaptations of serial number over time. 

There should be a way to adapt the metadata, but users know that the NFT can't be updated when it's in their wallet / distributed on the network.


## Rationale

 This ability of adapataion would gaurentee the data is immutable (if decentralized points is used) and the value earned from the data won't change even if the creator is disgruntled or malicious. Hedera network is uniquely positioned to create a method in which an NFT can be gaurenteed immutable outside the treasury wallet and mutable while inside the treasury wallet.


## User stories

As a token creator, I want a platform-standardized method to be able to adapt the metadata of an NFT that's in my treasury wallet without needing to burn the serial number and re-mint. I want to also gaurentee that the metadata is immutable after the NFT leaves the treasury wallet. 
  
## Specification


## Backwards Compatibility


## Security Implications


## How to Teach This


## Reference Implementation


## Rejected Ideas


## Open Issues


## References



## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
