---
hip: 866
title: Add EVM compatibility for non-supported Cancun blob features.
author: Danno Ferrin (@shemnon)
working-group: Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@nana-ec>, Jasper Potts <@jasperpotts>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>
requested-by: EVM Developers
type: Standards Track
category: Core
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Final
release: 0.50.1
last-call-date-time: 2024-02-28T07:00:00Z
created: 2024-01-24
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/872
updated: 2024-06-24
---

## Abstract

Add compatibility for Ethereum Mainnet Cancun features relating to Hedera's
non-support of EIP-4844 blobs.

## Motivation

In order to maintain maximum compatibility with Ethereum Mainnet there will need
to be support for some Blob opcodes in the EVM that behave appropriately in the
absence of Blobs support in Hedera. At the same time, space needs to be
preserved in the event Hedera provides similar Blob functionality that needs to
be mapped to the [EIP-4844](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4844) facilities.

## Rationale

In order to both preserve compatibility and future design space we need to act
as if blobs are not being added to Hedera. This allows existing contracts that
may depend on blob behavior to continue to function in the absence of blobs.

First we will prevent blobs from entering the system. There are complex EL/CL
interactions in Ethereum Mainnet, but as far as Hedera's consensus is similar to
Ethereum Mainnet's, the main entry point is a "Type 3" transaction that allows
blobs to be attached. Furthermore, Type 3 transactions require a blob to be
attached. Prohibiting Type 3 transactions will thus be sufficient to keep blobs
from entering the EVM's realm of concern and similarly will not prohibit other
interactions that are desirable to Hedera.

Second, we need to support the new opcodes but ensure they operate as they would
in the absence of any Blobs.

## User stories

* As a smart contract deployer, I want my smart contract that expects blob
  support to not fail in unexpected ways.
* As a smart contract user, I will receive appropriate errors when I attempt to
  introduce blobs via Ethereum transactions.
* As a future Hedera Core developer, I want the option to provide blob like
  behavior using EIP-4844 semantics and the related opcodes.

## Specification

### EVM Implementation

Two opcodes need to be supported. The `VERSIONEDHASH` opcode defined
in EIP-4844 and the `BLOBBASEFEE`
operation in [EIP-7516](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7516). These opcodes
should behave in the same way as though there are no blobs and that there never
have been blobs.

For `VERSIONEDHASH` this will result in returning all zeros whenever called, as
there are no versioned hashes in the current transaction. This is the behavior
if called from a legacy, Type 1, or Type 2 operation.

For `BLOBBASEFEE` this will result in returning `1` at all times, as the blob
gas cost cannot adjust below 1. This will require updating the `TxValues` object
with a blob fee of `1`.

Proper handling of the `TxValues` object in EVM transaction execution should
allow us to use the Besu opcodes without modification. This would consist of
always setting the `versionedHashes` to an empty list and setting
the `blobGasPrice` to 1 Gwei.

### Hedera Services Implementation

The `EthereumTransaction` transaction type in Hedera will need to reject all
type 3 transactions as invalid. The services should not need to parse the
transactions at this time as all Type 3 transactions will be rejected.

This behavior should be automatic in current implementation, as all unrecognized
types are rejected. To verify this system tests should be updated to add a valid
Type 3 transaction and an invalid transaction starting with the bytes `0x03`.

### JSON-RPC Relay Implementation

The JSON-RPC relay will need to be updated to reject type 3 transactions. There
are two main locations this could be seen. The `eth_sendRawTransaction` call may
receive fully formed Type 3 transactions. Those should be detected and rejected
with a specific error message. We could parse the transaction and ensure it is a
well-formed Type 3 transaction and provide different rejection messages. For now
this will be a distinction without a difference as both valid and invalid Type 3
transactions will be rejected.

Second, we will begin to see calls to the simulation and estimation
APIs (`eth_estimateGas`, `eth_call`) that may include fields indicating it is a
blob transaction. In those cases we should similarly detect that a blob
transaction is being simulated and reject the transaction before sending it to
the simulation and estimation engines.

### Mirror Node web3 Module Implementation

When parsing and displaying the transaction bodies of `EthereumTransactions` the
mirror node and web3 module will need to detect type 3 transactions and display
that they are rejected or reject them as part of their API. The error message
should contain a message about how Hedera does not support "Type 3 (Blob)"
transactions. All Type 3 transactions start with `0x03` and that can be used as
a rubric to detect them without parsing them.

## Backwards Compatibility

The core EVM library shipping with Hedera as of version 0.46 already contains
the needed EVM support. The activation will add a new Hedera EVM version that
will activate all the Cancun support in one release. The generation of the call
frame will need to be updated to set the BlobGasFee to 1. In prior EVM versions
this change will not be accessible.

## Security Implications

It is expected that disabling blobs in this fashion will not result in any new
or novel attacks against Hedera or the EVM subsystem.

## How to Teach This

User documentation will need a section discussing Ethereum Mainnet Blobs. It
needs to be made clear that blobs are not supported and that the support of the
two opcodes is meant as an affordance to systems that may introduce them in
contracts that do not actually require blobs to function correctly, such as
Layer 2 contracts. No tutorials should need to be updated as no useful features
are exposed.

## Reference Implementation

//TODO

## Rejected Ideas

The idea of supporting blobs via the Hedera Consensus Service was briefly
considered. Two major blockers made this inviable: (a) HCS messages are limited
to the Hedera transaction size (6 Kib total) and (b) there is no way currently
to sync consensus messages to the EVM, which may be necessary to ensure the
versioned hash matches data submitted to the consensus system. Future research
efforts may result in support of blobs.

## Open Issues

// none

## References

* [EIP-4844](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4844): Shard Blob Transactions
* [EIP-7516](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7516): BLOBBASEFEE opcode

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
