---
hip: 695
title: Enlarge the Contract Storage Limit to 24 KB
author: Justin Trollip <jtrollip@protonmail.com>
working-group: Technical Team <techteam@email.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Application
needs-council-approval: True
status: Draft
created: 2023-04-15
discussions-to: https://github.com/hedera/HIPs/issues/
updated: 2023-04-15
---

## Abstract

This HIP proposes to enlarge the contract storage limit on Hedera Hashgraph from 10 KB to 24 KB. The current storage limit may be a hindrance for developers who want to create larger or more complex smart contracts. Additionally, Ethereum, one of the leading smart contract platforms, has a 24 KB storage limit. Enlarging the storage limit on Hedera Hashgraph will provide developers with greater flexibility to create larger and more complex smart contracts and bring the platform more in line with industry standards.

## Motivation

The current contract storage limit of 10 KB may not be sufficient for developers who want to create larger or more complex smart contracts. This limit can be a hindrance for developers who are building decentralized applications on Hedera Hashgraph. Additionally, Ethereum, one of the leading smart contract platforms, has a 24 KB storage limit, which is widely accepted as a standard in the industry.

By enlarging the contract storage limit to 24 KB, Hedera Hashgraph will be more competitive with other smart contract platforms and will be more attractive to developers who are considering different platforms.

## Rationale

Enlarging the contract storage limit to 24 KB will provide significant benefits to developers who are building decentralized applications on Hedera Hashgraph. It will allow them to create larger and more complex smart contracts that can store more data, which will in turn enable the development of more sophisticated applications. Additionally, increasing the storage capacity will reduce the need for developers to create workarounds to stay within the current storage limit, which can be time-consuming and add unnecessary complexity to the application.

Furthermore, Ethereum's storage limit of 24 KB is widely accepted as a standard in the industry, and it is important for Hedera Hashgraph to remain competitive with other smart contract platforms. By increasing the storage limit to 24 KB, Hedera Hashgraph will be more attractive to developers who are considering different smart contract platforms.

## User stories

As a smart contract developer, I want to create larger and more complex smart contracts that can store more data, so that I can build more sophisticated decentralized applications.

## Specification

The technical specification for this proposal is to enlarge the contract storage limit on Hedera Hashgraph from 10 KB to 24 KB.

## Backwards Compatibility

This proposal does not introduce any backward incompatibilities.

## Security Implications

Enlarging the contract storage limit to 24 KB does not introduce any new security implications.

## How to Teach This

Not applicable

## Reference Implementation

There is no reference implementation for this proposal.

## Rejected Ideas

None.

## Open Issues

None.

## References

None.

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
