---
hip: 1086
title: Jumbo EthereumTransaction
author: Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>, Richard Bair <@rbair>
working-group: Richard Bair <@rbair>, Atul Mahamuni <@atul-hedera>, Leemon Baird <leemon@hedera.com>, Joseph Sinclair<@jsync-swirlds>, Edward Wertz<@edward-swirldslabs>
requested-by: Relay operators
type: Standards Track
category: Core, Service
needs-hiero-review: Yes
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Accepted
last-call-date-time: 2025-04-08T07:00:00Z
created: 2024-11-20
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/1085
hedera-reviewed-date: 2025-03-18
hedera-approval-status: Approved
updated: 2025-03-24
requires: 1084
---

## Abstract

This HIP introduces and supports "jumbo" Ethereum transactions by setting the the size of [EthereumTransaction.ethereum_data](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/blob/main/services/ethereum_transaction.proto#L69)`
to a configurable upper limit, and increases the limit on the total size of `EthereumTransaction` types from 6KB to a 
configurable upper limit. It also introduces a new throttle bucket that represents the max bytes-per-second for
accepting these "jumbo" transactions larger than 6KB on the network, such that each node gets 1/N of the jumbo
throttle bucket (using our existing throttle system).

## Motivation

Ethereum and other EVM networks permit significantly larger amounts of data in a call, up to 7.15 MB of call data, 
whereas all Hiero transactions are capped at 6KB. Smart contracts that are larger than 6KB have to be uploaded 
to the Hiero File Service (HFS) through a `FileCreate` transaction followed by multiple `FileAppend` 
transactions. Not only does this lead to a poor developer experience, but it makes operating a JSON-RPC relay 
difficult and expensive. Allowing `ethereum_data` in excess of 6KB provides parity with most non-rollup use cases.  
Enabling single-transaction parity with most Ethereum smart contracts and calls improves  
compatibility, developer experience, and makes it easier to operate a JSON-RPC relay.

## Rationale

Hiero limits all transactions to a maximum size of 6KB. By limiting the size of transactions, Hiero makes it easier
for clients to get fair access to the network. Ethereum, on the other hand, supports much larger callData 
sizes. The 6KB limit is highly problematic for developer experience, and unexpectedly, for network efficiency. This 
is especially true when creating contracts, and for oracles sending large amounts of data to the network.

When creating a new smart contract, if the smart contract `initcode` and all other bytes for the transaction 
(including signatures) together exceed 6KB, then the user cannot simply create a contract the way they would on 
Ethereum or other networks. They must instead use the Hiero File Service (HFS) to create a file, and then submit an 
`EthereumTransaction` with the file id of the `call_data`.
This has several challenges:

- The workflow for Hiero is different from Ethereum and other EVM networks
- Uploading a file is expensive, and requires multiple transactions (since the file upload itself is also limited to
  6KB per transaction)
- The file, if not deleted after use, takes up storage space needlessly
- If the smart contract has already been deployed and the user has a lot of callData (such as an oracle with a large
  amount of data), then the user likewise must use HFS to upload the callData in chunks to a file on chain, and then
  issue an EthereumTransaction in such a way as to use that previously uploaded file as the callData.
- Overall deployment / call latency is increased due to the need to upload files and then reference them in the
  Ethereum transactions.

In addition, JSON-RPC relays need to find a business model whereby they can charge users for these HFS transactions.
This creates a poor developer experience. This again breaks the business model of many cross chain relay operators and
makes access to cheap relays difficult.

## User stories

1. As an `EOA` submitting a transaction with large call data I expect the network to accept my transaction and charge me
   the appropriate amount of gas.
2. As a `relay` I want to provide a service for users where they can submit and pay for transactions without increasing
   my own costs or establishing an out-of-band business model for working with users.

## Specification

- Permit EthereumTransaction `ethereum_data` max size to be configurable but not exceed a specified upper limit in KBs
- The entire transaction, including signatures, may exceed 6KB but shall not exceed a configurable upper limit in KBs
- Institute a network-wide throttle on bytes-per-second for "jumbo" EthereumTransactions larger than 6KB.

### Execution

A new configurable throttle bucket will be introduced that represents the max bytes-per-second of the network for 
transactions larger than 6KB, such that each node gets 1/N of that throttle bucket (using our existing throttle 
system). If any transaction received exceeds 6KB in size, then it is classified as a "jumbo" transaction. In 
addition to the normal throttle limits, the number of bytes exceeding 6KB will be added to the 'jumbo' throttle
bucket. If the bucket does not have capacity, then the transaction will be rejected.

The pricing will be determined by deployments and specified as part of the network configuration. 

A JSON-RPC relay *should* calculate the HBAR cost of the transaction and verify the sender has sufficient funds before
sending the transaction to the network to avoid due diligence failure fees.

This HIP only permits the `EthereumTransaction` to be "jumbo" transactions. Any other transactions exceeding 6KB should 
be rejected unless specifically allowed by a future HIP.

### Consensus

The configured value for the size of an event in gossip should be set greater than one full-sized jumbo transaction 
plus room for all the needed event meta data. If the max size of events prevent carrying at least 1 jumbo 
transactions, then any node receiving a single max sized jumbo transaction will have its transaction pool clogged and 
the node will need to be restarted. This property should be checked at startup.  The node should exit if the 
configured event size is too small.  

### SDK

Today, if a user wants to create a contract with a large amount of callData, they must first upload the callData to a
file in the HFS, and then reference that file in Ethereum transactions. The SDK attempts to manage this complexity
for the user automatically. With this HIP, SDKs should be updated to automatically use jumbo transactions when the
`ethereum_data` causes the transaction to exceed the default network 6kb limit. The SDK should support an option to 
use HFS for callData if the user prefers to manage the complexity themselves.

### Mirror Node

A Mirror Node should not be impacted or require any changes. With the allowed increase in Ethereum transaction size,
the use of HFS for Ethereum data will be lessened. The Mirror Node should be able to handle both jumbo
Ethereum transactions and legacy HFS-based Ethereum transactions.

### Relay

The JSON-RPC relay will be updated to use jumbo transactions. It will no longer use files for large callData.

## Backwards Compatibility

Behavior for the consensus node is fully backwards compatible. The default behavior for SDKs will change to use
jumbo transactions, which may surprise users who are not expecting the change, and the overall cost may be higher than
if the user had used HFS. However, the user can still use HFS if they prefer.

Users of a JSON-RPC relay may see the price in HBAR change as a result of jumbo transactions. They will also see in the
Mirror Node Explorer a single large transaction rather than many small transactions (`FileCreate` and `FileAppend`)
followed by one small `EthereumTransaction`.

## Security Implications

The consensus node will need to take care when ingesting data. Today, with a limit of 6KB, the consensus node can
maintain very small memory buffers for each connection. The consensus node should now be updated to allow "linking"
smaller buffers together when needed for jumbo transactions. This keeps memory usage minimal (vs. if every buffer was
"jumbo" sized).

Fair ordering of transactions requires that transactions are added to gossip events in the order they are
received. Since jumbo transactions occupy more space and events are capped to a configured max size, a large number of
consecutive jumbo transactions can cause the transaction pool in the receiving node to back up.  For this reason a 
bytes/second throttle is necessary to limit the number of jumbo transactions received by a node per second. 

Let `X` be the number of events created per second by a node. Let `E` be the configured max transaction payload per 
event. Let `T` be the configured max KB size per jumbo Ethereum transaction. Let `N` be the number of nodes in the
network.  Let `J` be the configured jumbo transaction throttle in bytes per second for the entire network.
Then the maximum throttle value allowed for a network should be `J < N * (X * Floor(E / T))`.
Each node will be able to accept `J/N` bytes per second in jumbo transactions without the possibility of a DOS attack
through the event creation rate. 

The configured event size must be large enough to allow at least 1 jumbo transaction per event. 

## How to Teach This

With this HIP, the behavior of Ethereum transactions will better match expectations for Ethereum developers. There
should be documentation added to docs.hedera.com to cover this and the documentation for the SDKs should be
updated. The main point to be described to users will be how the jumbo transactions are priced and throttled.

## References

- [EthereumTransaction protobuf specification](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/blob/main/services/ethereum_transaction.proto)
- [Hedera JSON RPC Relay](https://docs.hedera.com/hedera/core-concepts/smart-contracts/json-rpc-relay)
- [HIP 410](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-410)
- [HIP 1084](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1084)
- [EIP-3860](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3860)
- [EIP-7623](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7623)

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or
(https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
