---
hip: 329
title: Support CREATE2 opcode
author: Michael Tinker <michael.tinker@hedera.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Final
last-call-date-time: 2022-02-01T07:00:00Z
release: v0.23.0
created: 2022-01-14
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/328
updated: 2022-04-26
---

## Abstract

[EIP-1014](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1014) introduced the `CREATE2` opcode to let a 
contract be deployed to a predictable address on the Ethereum blockchain. 

Because each Hedera entity must have a unique `0.0.X` id, and the Solidity address of a 
Hedera contract is currently _determined_ by its `0.0.X` id, there has not, historically, 
been a natural way to implement `CREATE2` on our ledger.

But after [HIP-32](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-32), there is now a mechanism in the code 
that provides a level of indirection between a `ByteString` "alias" and a `0.0.X` id. We propose
in this HIP to implement `CREATE2` by re-using the alias mechanism to link the deterministic 
address specified in EIP-1014 to a new contract's `0.0.X` id.

To externalize this `0.0.X`-to-address link to mirror nodes in the record stream, we propose to 
re-use the "internal" transaction records introduced in [HIP-206](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-206),
only adding a new `bytes evm_address` field to the record. To simplify client calls to 
contracts created via `CREATE2`, we propose to extend the Hedera API (HAPI) protobufs so that
this `evm_address` identifier can be used anywhere HAPI accepts a `ContractID`.

## Motivation

Standard implementations of a distributed exchange (DEX), for example, make heavy use of 
the `CREATE2` opcode. This opcode can also improve user onboarding flows in dApps. We want 
to let such applications to be deployed on Hedera.

## Rationale

The business value of this HIP is self-evident, so the only decision points are in the changes
to Services code and protobuf messages. Our reasoning is that:
  1. Re-use of the alias mechanism reduces risk and complexity in the codebase.
  2. Externalizing created `0.0.X`-to-address links via a new `evm_address` field in a
     child record follows the same pattern used in auto-account creation.
  3. Although the `GetBySolidityIDQuery` _could_ be re-enabled, and clients required to use it  
     to look up the `ContractID` of an EVM address, this poorly named query is not free---and 
     some clients may want to pre-compute the `CREATE2` address and use it directly.

## User stories

- As a Hedera DEX operator, I want to re-use standard Solidity contracts that use the `CREATE2` opcode.

## Specification

- Implement the `CREATE2` EVM opcode `0xF5` in Services by linking the EIP-1014 address to the new 
contract's underlying `0.0.X` id as an alias, and updating the EVM address lookup to be alias-aware. 
- When the `ADDRESS` EVM opcode is executed in the context of a contract with an EIP-1014 address,
preferentially return the EIP-1014 address instead of the "mirror" `0x0000...<X>` address that 
derives from the contract's `0.0.X` id.
- Externalize this `evm_address`-to-`0.0.X` link via new `ContractCreate` child records which 
will now be created for **every** internal EVM creation (whether processed with `CREATE` or `CREATE2`).
- _(HAPI)_ Include a new `bytes evm_address` field in the `TransactionRecord` message, to be populated 
in these child transaction records. 
- _(HAPI)_ Deprecate the `createdContractIDs` field in the `ContractFunctionResult` message, since this 
information will now be duplicated by the new child transactions.
- _(HAPI)_ When the `0.0.<alias>` form of an `AccountID` is used in a `CryptoTransferTransactionBody`,
respect use of an `evm_address` for the `alias` portion; thus allowing a HAPI client to do a native 
transfer of assets to a contract known only by its `CREATE2` address. 
- _(HAPI)_ Extend the `ContractID` protobuf message as below, so that an `evm_address` identifier can be
used anywhere that HAPI accepts a `ContractID`.
```
message ContractID {
    /**  
     * The shard number (nonnegative)
     */
    int64 shardNum = 1; 

    /**  
     * The realm number (nonnegative)
     */
    int64 realmNum = 2; 

    oneof contract {
        /**  
        * A nonnegative number unique within a given shard and realm
        */
        int64 contractNum = 3; 

        /**  
        * The 20-byte EVM address of the contract to call. 
        * 
        * Every contract has an EVM address determined by its <tt>shard.realm.num</tt> id.
        * This address is as follows:
        *   <ol>
        *     <li>The first 4 bytes are the big-endian representation of the shard.</li>
        *     <li>The next 8 bytes are the big-endian representation of the realm.</li>
        *     <li>The final 8 bytes are the big-endian representation of the number.</li>
        *   </ol>  
        * 
        * Contracts created via CREATE2 have an <b>additional, primary address</b> that is 
        * derived from the <a href="https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1014">EIP-1014</a> 
        * specification, and does not have a simple relation to a <tt>shard.realm.num</tt> id. 
        * 
        * (Please do note that CREATE2 contracts can also be referenced by the three-part 
        * EVM address described above.)
        */
        bytes evm_address = 4;
    }
}
```

## Backwards Compatibility

No existing contract should be affected by this HIP---unless it was failing due to use of 
`CREATE2`, in which case it should become functional.

## Security Implications

The Ethereum community and others have now demonstrated patterns that allow safe use of `CREATE2`.
As long as users follow the patterns in these contracts, there should not be security implications.

## How to Teach This

"Implement EIP-1014 on Hedera to allow creating contracts at pre-determined addresses."

## Reference Implementation

The user-facing changes to HAPI have been discussed in [this PR](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/pull/138).

## Rejected Ideas

In principle, it may be possible to make `CREATE2` addresses globally unique across all shards. 
But the extreme complexity of this task did not seem justified by the value provided.

## Open Issues

No blocking issues are known at this time.

## References

- [EIP-1014](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1014)
- [HIP-32](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-32)
- [HIP-206](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-206)
- [Protobufs PR #138](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/pull/138)

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
