---
hip: 173
title: Opt-in merged scheduling
author: Michael Tinker <michael.tinker@hedera.com>, Anirudh Ghanta <anirudh.ghanta@hedera.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Accepted
last-call-date-time: 2021-11-23T07:00:00Z
created: 2021-10-18
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/172
updated: 2021-10-18
---

## Abstract

If a `ScheduleCreate` tries to re-create an existing scheduled transaction, the network rejects 
it with `IDENTICAL_SCHEDULE_ALREADY_CREATED`. (Recall that two scheduled transactions are 
[_identical_](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/blob/main/docs/scheduled-transactions/revised-spec.md#duplicate-creations)
if they match on three fields: The `scheduledTransactionBody`, the `memo` and the `adminKey`.)

This behavior is a reasonable---albeit conservative---default, since there is always a chance that 
the involved parties _really_ wanted two separate transactions, and only "collided" by accident.

However, in some cases the scheduling parties can avoid accidental collisions. In such a case, when 
two or more parties submit `ScheduleCreate`s with the same transaction, the network can better serve 
their needs by "merging" all the provided signatures into the same scheduled transaction.

In this HIP we propose a new protobuf field `ScheduleCreateTransactionBody#merge_with_identical_schedule`
which, if set to `true`, switches the network's behavior to this more friendly "merged" scheduling. The only 
exception is to be if the existing schedule has an explicit `payerAccountID` different than the effective
`payerAccountID` for the `ScheduleCreate`; then the network will fail the `ScheduleCreate` with
`IDENTICAL_SCHEDULE_ALREADY_EXISTS_WITH_DIFFERENT_PAYER`.

## Motivation

Suppose a consensus node network is monitoring a stream of events, where each event `e` is uniquely identified
by a hash `He`, and should trigger the scheduling of a single related transaction `Xe` that needs a majority 
of the consensus nodes' signatures to execute. 

Suppose also that the consensus nodes all set `memo=He` when trying to schedule transaction `Xe`. Then by the 
uniqueness of the memos, there is no risk that two identical `ScheduleCreate`s are _actually_ intended for 
two different events. 

Nonetheless, with current network behavior, only the first consensus node to submit the `ScheduleCreate` for 
event `e` will have a "normal" workflow. All the other consensus nodes will receive `IDENTICAL_SCHEDULE_ALREADY_CREATED`, 
and need to submit a second `ScheduleSign` transaction to attach their signature to the scheduled `Xe` transaction.

This is at best inconvenient, as the network is enforcing protection the consensus node network simply does not need.

## Rationale

Improve the user experience when scheduling transactions on the network, especially in the use case
of a consensus node network as above.

## Specification

This HIP extends the `ScheduleCreateTransationBody` as follows,
```
message ScheduleCreateTransactionBody {
  SchedulableTransactionBody scheduledTransactionBody = 1;
  string memo = 2;
  Key adminKey = 3;
  AccountID payerAccountID = 4;

  /** 
   * Controls how the network will behave when there is an identical transaction already scheduled (but not yet executed).
   * 
   * If merge_with_identical_schedule=true, when this ScheduleCreate "collides" with an existing scheduled transaction, it 
   * will behave as a ScheduleSign for that schedule UNLESS the existing schedule includes an explicit payerAccountID different 
   * than the effective payerAccountID for this ScheduleCreate. In this case, it will resolve to 
   * IDENTICAL_SCHEDULE_ALREADY_EXISTS_WITH_DIFFERENT_PAYER and have no effects on the existing schedule.
   * 
   * If merge_with_identical_schedule=false, this ScheduleCreate will resolve to IDENTICAL_SCHEDULE_ALREADY_CREATED, and the 
   * receipt will contain the id of the existing schedule entity.
   */
  bool merge_with_identical_schedule = 5;
}
```

It stipulates the network's behavior for a `ScheduleCreate` then match the comment above.

## Backwards Compatibility

This HIP does not make any breaking changes. Clients that keep using the current protobufs will 
keep the same semantics for their `ScheduleCreate` transactions, since the default value of the
`merge_with_identical_schedule` flag will be `false`.

## Security Implications

We do not see any security implications for this change. If a client such as a consensus node network 
opts-in to merged scheduling, but cannot ensure duplicate `ScheduleCreate` transactions are 
always functionally equivalent, it could suffer a correctness failure. But this would be a form 
of user error, not a problem with the network.

## How to Teach This

In one sentence: "If you opt-in to merged scheduling, your `ScheduleCreate` will turn into a 
`ScheduleSign` when somebody else has already scheduled your transaction."

## Reference Implementation

Ongoing.
- For protobufs changes, please follow [this issue](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/pull/98).
- For node software changes, please follow [this issue](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/issues/2269).

## Rejected Ideas

We briefly considered changing the default network behavior to "merged" scheduling, instead of 
introducing a new field to the `ScheduleCreateTransactionBody`. But not all use cases will have
operational properties that make merged scheduling a safe default.

## Open Issues

We are not aware of any issues blocking implementation at this time.

## References

Not applicable.

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
