---
hip: 1046
title: Adding support for gRPC-Web proxy endpoints to the Address Book
author: Joseph Sinclair <Joseph Sinclair<@jsync-swirlds>, Mark Blackman <mark@swirldslabs.com>, Simi Hunjan <simi@hashgraph.com>
working-group: Mike Cave <mike@hedera.com>, Alex Popowycz <a@hedera.com>, Steven Sheehy <@steven-sheehy>
requested-by: Hedera
type: Standards Track
category: Core
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Last Call
last-call-date-time: 2024-10-29T07:00:00Z
created: 2024-09-18
updated: 2024-10-29
---

## Abstract

Frontend applications using the Hedera JavaScript SDK face challenges because of
lack of support for direct gRPC requests.

Currently, gRPC-Web servers bypass these restrictions, but their endpoints are
not included in the Hedera Address Book. As a result, the JavaScript SDK uses
hard-coded gRPC-Web endpoints, which is inefficient and requires manual updates.
This becomes increasingly unsustainable as Hedera decentralizes and more
independent nodes are added.

We propose enhancing the Hedera Address Book to include gRPC-Web endpoints,
enabling the JavaScript SDK to dynamically select the appropriate ones,
improving scalability and efficiency.

## Motivation

Hedera offers a gRPC API for various transactions, accessible through SDKs.
These SDKs support both backend applications (e.g., node.js) and frontend web
applications and plug-ins. Backend applications can connect directly to the
network proxies' gRPC endpoint. However, frontend applications must comply with
browser security sandbox rules, which block mixed content (i.e., HTTP requests
from HTTPS pages) and do not permit the low-level HTTP2 access required for
direct gRPC requests.

Therefore frontend applications and web plug-ins using the Hedera JavaScript SDK
face challenges due to browser security restrictions. This necessitates the use
of gRPC-Web proxy servers with TLS endpoints signed by trusted certificate
authorities, which require fully qualified domain names (FQDNs).

Presently, gRPC-Web server endpoints are not supported in the Hedera Address
Book. To work around this gRPC-Web endpoints are hard-coded in the JavaScript
SDK. This is not a scalable or efficient solution as it requires manual updates
and coordination. The problem will only get worse as Hedera continues
decentralization of the network and independent node operation, where this
coordination is not possible.

We propose enhancing the Hedera address book to include gRPC-Web endpoint
information, allowing the JavaScript SDK to dynamically determine the
appropriate endpoints. This will be achieved by:

1. **Extending the Address Book Schema**: Modify the address book schema to
   include entries for gRPC-Web endpoints.
2. **Dynamic Discovery**: Update the JavaScript SDK to dynamically retrieve the
   gRPC-Web endpoints from the address book.
3. **Query Availability**: Update the Mirror Node to recognize gRPC-Web entries
   in the address book and make those entries available for the SDK to query.

By implementing these changes, we can ensure that frontend applications can
securely and efficiently connect to the Hedera network using dynamically
discovered, decentralized TLS endpoints. This will improve the network's
resilience, scalability, and overall user experience.

## Rationale

Given that this proposal involves an incremental change to the already existing
Hedera Address Book, the design is straightforward. The primary goal is to
enhance the address book to include gRPC-Web endpoint information, allowing
frontend applications to dynamically determine the appropriate endpoints.

*Why:* Updating the JavaScript SDK to dynamically retrieve gRPC-Web endpoints
from the address book eliminates the need for hard-coded endpoints. This design
decision enhances flexibility and scalability, allowing frontend applications to
adapt to changes in the network configuration without requiring manual updates.

*Alternatives Considered:* Another alternative was to continue with the current
practice of hard-coding endpoints within the SDK. However, this method is not
sustainable as it requires frequent updates and coordination, particularly as
Hedera continues to decentralize. Dynamic discovery provides a more robust and
future-proof solution.

## User stories

1. As a Frontend Developer, I want the Hedera JavaScript SDK to dynamically
   retrieve gRPC-Web endpoints, so that my web application can securely connect
   to the Hedera network even as gRPC-Web endpoints change over time.

    Acceptance Criteria:

    - The SDK retrieves the gRPC-Web endpoints from the address book automatically.
    - The application connects securely using the latest TLS endpoints.
    - Any changes in the network configuration are reflected without requiring SDK updates.

2. As a gRPC-Web Node Operator, I want to update the FQDN for my node’s endpoint
   in the address book, so that developers can automatically use the correct,
   secure endpoint without needing manual intervention.

    Acceptance Criteria:

    - Node operator can update gRPC-Web endpoint in the address book
    - The updated endpoint is propagated to all frontend applications using the
      Hedera JavaScript SDK.
    - The process is simple and does not require extensive coordination with SDK
      maintainers

3. As an Hedera community member I want to run my own gRPC-Web proxy for my
   consensus node and make it visible to the community to assist in growing
   the network.

    Acceptance Criteria:

    - A community member can launch a gRPC-Web proxy without external interaction.
    - A community member can submit a request to have their gRPC-Web proxy added
      to the network address book.

## Specification

The dynamic address book stores an entry in state for each node (only consensus,
currently).  This HIP proposes to extend that “address book” concept to include
gRPC-Web proxy endpoints as an additional entry in the existing `Node`
`service_endpoint` list The expectation is that these additional node endpoints
will be managed with the same `nodeCreate`, `nodeUpdate`, and `nodeDelete`
transactions that manage the other endpoints for consensus nodes. The only
changes needed are one additional field in the `ServiceEndpoint` message and
one enumeration to describe the service endpoint purpose.

Any entity wishing to operate a gRPC-Web proxy would request to have that
endpoint added to the network address book via a `nodeUpdate` (which, initially,
requires council approval), and would manage that endpoint via `nodeUpdate` as
needed to maintain current and up-to-date information for the service endpoint(s)
of the consensus node behind that proxy.

### Protobufs

Add a new field to `NodeCreateTransactionBody`.

```protobuf
message ServiceEndpoint {
...
    /**
     * A purpose for this service endpoint.<br/>
     * This is one of several options, including a gossip endpoint,
     * a gRPC endpoint, or a gRPC-Web Proxy endpoint, among others.
     * <p>
     * This field is REQUIRED.<br/>
     * This field MUST match the actual purpose of this endpoint.<br/>
     * There MUST NOT be more than one "gossip" endpoint for each `Node`.<br/>
     * There MUST NOT be more than one "secure gRPC" endpoint for
     * each `Node`.<br/>
     * If a `Node` has a "secure gRPC" endpoint, it SHOULD NOT have an
     * "insecure gRPC endpoint.
     */
    ServiceEndpointPurpose purpose = 4;
}
```

Add a new enumeration for service endpoint purpose.

```protobuf
/**
 * An enumeration of possible "purpose" values.<br/>
 * This enumeration is used to describe the purpose of each `ServiceEndpoint`
 * entry in a list of service endpoints. The canonical use is to describe
 * the service endpoint purpose for values in the `service_endpoint` field
 * of a `Node`.
 */
enum ServiceEndpointPurpose {
    /**
     * An endpoint used to gossip transactions or other data.
     */
    GOSSIP = 0;

    /**
     * An endpoint that provides a TLS secured gRPC API.
     */
    SECURE_GRPC = 1;

    /**
     * An endpoint that provides an un-secured gRPC API.
     */
    INSECURE_GRPC = 2;

    /**
     * An endpoint that provides a TLS secured web proxy for gRPC requests
     * from clients that cannot directly connect to gRPC endpoints.
     */
    SECURE_GRPC_WEB_PROXY = 3;

    /**
     * An endpoint that provides an un-secured web proxy for gRPC requests
     * from clients that cannot directly connect to gRPC endpoints.
     */
    INSECURE_GRPC_WEB_PROXY = 4;
}
```

## Backwards Compatibility

Initially, there should be no change or impact to existing users of the SDKs and
gRPC-Web proxies.
The current set of nodes will remain available at the current addresses. After
all SDKs are migrated to use dynamic lookup of the addresses via the mirror node
APIs, the existing nodes are expected to remain at the current addresses for
some time, but may, eventually, begin to migrate. Clients using SDKs should
adopt the new SDK versions that support dynamic address lookup within this time
period. Clients not using SDKs to access the gRPC-Web proxies should also migrate
to look up the node addresses via the mirror node APIs in the same time period.
Any client that chooses to continue using the legacy approach of manually
maintaining a fixed static list of gRPC-Web proxies may continue to do so, with
the constraint that those entities may need to make more frequent updates to
their static lists, but the information for those updates will be available
from the mirror node.

## Security Implications

There are no known security issues prevented or created by this HIP.

SDK clients _may_ be more resilient against certain highly sophisticated
forms of interception; though the practical value of preventing such
actions is extremely low.

## How to Teach This

The Address Book documentation will be updated to include the new service
endpoint options.
Additionally, a blog post or video will be created to explain the change,
ensuring developers understand it and are aware that it will not affect
existing SDK-based applications.

## Reference Implementation

The reference implementation must be complete before any HIP is given the status
of “Final”. The final implementation must include test code and documentation.

## Rejected Ideas

Configuration on the consensus nodes, with the same data configured for the SDK.

An Hedera File System (HFS) file containing the list in a JSON document.
This would require Mirror Node to read that file and offer an API to query the contents.

## Open Issues

No open issues

## References

https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-grpcWeb-proxy

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
