---
hip: 336
title: Approval and Allowance API for Tokens
author: Albert Tam <albert.tam@hedera.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
last-call-date-time: 2021-02-14T07:00:00Z
status: Council Review
created: 2022-01-11
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/337
updated: 2022-03-10
---

## Abstract

Describes the addition of Services APIs to approve and exercise allowances to a third party account. The allowances grant another account the right to transfer hbar, fungible and non-fungible tokens from your account.

## Motivation

The current Services CryptoTransfer API allows a user to transfer hbar, fungible and non-fungible tokens but does not permit any other account to act as a delegate or proxy. The addition of the allowance APIs will permit cryptocurrency exchanges and wallets to trade on their customer's behalf without requiring the customer to  sign every transaction in advance.

## User stories

As a user, I want to enable another user the ability to spend `x` tokens (hbar and fungible tokens) from my account so that they can trade on my behalf without requiring that I expose my private key to them.

As a user, I want to enable another user the ability to spend specific non-fungible tokens from my account so that they can trade on my behalf without requiring that I expose my private key to them.

As a user, I want to enable another user the ability to spend all instances of a particular non-fungible token that I currently or may in the future hold in my account so that they can trade on my behalf without requiring that I expose my private key to them.

As a user, I want to modify or remove an allowance I have granted to another user so that I can manage that user's ability to spend my tokens over time.

As a user that has been granted an allowance, I want to be able to  transfer tokens owned by the owner account as if they were my tokens so that I can issue transfers on their behalf without them having to expose their private key.

As a user, I want to query my account for the current token allowances that I have granted to other users so that I can monitor the activity of my delegates.
  
## Specification

### Terminology

The following terms will be used repeatedly throughout this section:

- owner: the account that owns the tokens.
- spender: the delegate account, the account being granted the power to spend the owner’s tokens.
- recipient: the receiver of tokens when the spender issues a `CryptoTransfer ` operation.

### Add Allowance Balances to CryptoGetInfoResponse

The repeated fields `crypto_allowances`, `nft_allowances ` and `token_allowances` will be added to the `CryptoGetInfoResponse` message. The `crypto_allowances`, `nft_allowances` and `token_allowances` fields will contain hbar, non-fungible token and fungible token allowances respectively.

```protobuf
// new message
message CryptoAllowance {
	AccountID owner = 1;
	AccountID spender = 2;
	int64 amount = 3;
}

// new message
message TokenAllowance {
	TokenID tokenId = 1;
	AccountID owner = 2;
	AccountID spender = 3;
	int64 amount = 4;
}
	
// new message
message NftAllowance {
	TokenID tokenId = 1;
	AccountID owner = 2;
	AccountID spender = 3;
	repeated int64 serialNumbers = 4;
	google.protobuf.BoolValue approvedForAll = 5;
}

// existing protobuf
message CryptoGetInfoResponse {
		
	// existing nested message
	message AccountInfo {
		// existing fields
		AccountID accountID = 1;
		string contractAccountID = 2;
		bool deleted = 3;
		AccountID proxyAccountID = 4;
		int64 proxyReceived = 6;
		Key key = 7;
		uint64 balance = 8;
		uint64 generateSendRecordThreshold = 9 [deprecated=true];
		uint64 generateReceiveRecordThreshold = 10 [deprecated=true];
		bool receiverSigRequired = 11;
		Timestamp expirationTime = 12;
		Duration autoRenewPeriod = 13;
		repeated LiveHash liveHashes = 14;
		repeated TokenRelationship tokenRelationships = 15;
		string memo = 16;
		int64 ownedNfts = 17;
		int32 max_automatic_token_associations = 18;
		bytes alias = 19;
		bytes ledger_id = 20;

		// new fields
		repeated CryptoAllowance crypto_allowances = 21;
		repeated NftAllowance nft_allowances = 22;
		repeated TokenAllowance token_allowances = 23;
	}

	// existing fields
	ResponseHeader header = 1;
	AccountInfo accountInfo = 2;
}
```

The `TokenAllowance` message will contain the allowance information for a single fungible token tranferable by the `spender`.

The `NftAllowance` message will contain the allowance information for a non-fungible token. A `spender` will only have access to the specific NFT serial numbers that the owner has granted them (exception being `approvedForAll` case, explained below).

For non-fungible tokens the `approvedForAll` field may be set to `true` if the spender has been granted access to all instances of the NFT owned by the owner. If an NFT has `approvedForAll` set to `true` then `serialNumbers` will not contain any values.

Only allowances with a non-zero value will be returned.

The `spender`'s allowance will change as tokens are spent or additional allowances are approved by the token owner.

### Add CryptoApproveAllowance API

A new Hedera API will be added under the Crypto Service called `CryptoApproveAllowance`. This function is called by the token owner to create a series of allowances for a spender account.

```protobuf
message CryptoAllowance {
	AccountID owner = 1;
	AccountID spender = 2;
	int64 amount = 3;
}

message TokenAllowance {
	TokenID tokenId = 1;
	AccountID owner = 2;
	AccountID spender = 3;
	int64 amount = 4;
}

message NftAllowance {
	TokenID tokenId = 1;
	AccountID owner = 2;
	AccountID spender = 3;
	repeated int64 serialNumbers = 4;
	google.protobuf.BoolValue approvedForAll = 5;
}
	
message CryptoApproveAllowanceTransactionBody {
	repeated CryptoApproval cryptoAllowances = 1;
	repeated NftAllowance nftAllowances = 2;
	repeated TokenAllowance tokenAllowances = 3;
}
```

This function contains a list of hbar and/or token approval messages. The `CryptoAllowance` and `TokenAllowance` messages will set an allowance of `amount` fungible tokens or hbar that can be transferred from the owner's account to another account by the `spender` account. The `NftAllowance` message sets an allowance for specific NFT serial numbers within the owner's account. Each of the hbar/token approvals in the list do not need to refer to the same spender. The owner can establish different allowances for various spenders in a single transaction.

The total number of approvals contained within the transaction body cannot exceed 20. This number includes all hbar, fungible and non-fungible token approvals. Note that each NFT serial number counts as a single approval, hence a transaction granting 20 serial numbers to a spender will use all of the approvals permitted for the transaction.

The `amount` must be specified in terms of the `decimals` value for the token. If `amount` is 0 the transaction will remove the `spender`'s allowance from the owner's account, thereby freeing an allowance for future use.

In order to grant the `spender` access to *all* of the owner's instances of a particular NFT, the `approvedForAll` field in the `NftAllowance` message should be set to `true`.

If the `spender` has already been granted `approvedForAll` for an owner's NFT and another transaction granting `approvedForAll` is sent for the same NFT, the transaction will be accepted and fees charged but it will effectively be a no-op. Similarly if multiple transactions to remove `approvedForAll` on the same NFT are received the effect will be idempotent.

It is not an error if the total token amount in the owner's account is less than the specified allowance `amount`. If the `spender` tries to transfer more tokens than exists in the owner's account that transaction will fail.

It *IS* an error if an NFT allowance specifies a serial number that the owner does not have possession of.

It is not an error if either the spender or owner's accounts are frozen or KYC-revoked for the specified token type. If the `spender` tries to transfer a token under these conditions, the transaction will fail anyway.

It is not an error if the token is paused and an allowance approval is submitted.

The transaction must be signed by the owner's account and transaction fees will be paid by the owner only.

Each account is limited to 100 allowances. This limit spans hbar, fungible and non-fungible token allowances. Each NFT serial number will count as a single allowance when computing the total allowances an account currently has.

The number of allowances set on an account will increase the auto renewal fee for the account. Conversely, removing allowances will decrease the auto renewal fee for the account.

The allowance approval transaction will fail under the following circumstances:

- The `spender` account is the same as the owner's account.
- The `amount` will exceed the maximum supply of the token.
- `amount` is negative.
- The owner account is not associated with the specified token.
- The owner account does not own the specified NFT serial numbers.
- A serial number for an NFT does not exist.
- The token referenced in an NFT allowance is fungible.
- Duplicate crypto or fungible token allowances for a spender are specified.
- Duplicate NFT serial number allowances for a spender are specified.
- No allowances are specified. 

### Add CryptoAdjustAllowance API

A new Hedera API will be added under the Crypto Service called `CryptoAdjustAllowance`. This function is called by the token owner to modify an existing allowance for a spender account.

```protobuf
message CryptoAllowance {
	AccountID spender = 1;
	int64 amount = 2;
}

message TokenAllowance {
	TokenID tokenId = 1;
	AccountID spender = 2;
	int64 amount = 3;
}

message NftAllowance {
	TokenID tokenId = 1;
	AccountID spender = 2;
	repeated int64 serialNumbers = 3;
	google.protobuf.BoolValue approvedForAll = 4;
}

message CryptoAdjustAllowanceTransactionBody {
	repeated CryptoApproval cryptoAllowances = 1;
	repeated NftAllowance nftAllowances = 2;
	repeated TokenAllowance tokenAllowances = 3;
}
```

This function will modify a series of existing allowances. The `cryptoAllowances`, `nftAllowances` and `tokenAllowances` fields specify adjustments to crypto allowances, non-fungible token allowances and fungible token allowances respectively.

The `amount` field in the `CryptoAllowance` and `TokenAllowance` messages is signed, thus this function can be used to increase or decrease an approved allowance.

The `NftAllowance` message is used to modify the NFT serial number list for a spender. If the NFT serial number is *positive* then the NFT will be added to the approved list. Conversely if the serial number is *negative* the NFT will be removed from the approved list.

If the caller wants to remove all serial numbers from the approved list the `approvedForAll` field should be set to `false`. If the `approvedForAll` field is set to `true`, the serial number list for the spender will also be purged as the spender is granted access to all NFT instances and an enumeration is not required.

Each of the hbar/token approvals in the list do not need to refer to the same spender. The owner can modify different allowances for various spenders in a single transaction.

This message body is exactly the same as `CryptoApproveAllowanceTransactionBody` but is duplicated in case adjustment specific changes are required in the future.

The `amount` must be specified in terms of the `decimals` value for the token.  If the addition of `amount` to the `spender`'s current allowance equals 0, the transaction will remove the `spender`'s allowance from the owner's account, thereby freeing an allowance for future use.

If the `spender` does not have an allowance established with the caller for the specified token and the `amount` is positive, this transaction will implicitly create a new approved allowance for the `spender` for `amount` tokens.

It is not an error if the total token amount in the caller’s account is less than the `spender`'s current allowance plus the specified `amount`.

It *IS* an error if an NFT allowance specifies a serial number that the owner does not have possession of.

It is not an error if either the spender or owner's accounts are frozen or KYC-revoked for the specified token type. If the `spender` tries to transfer a token under these conditions, the transaction will fail anyway.

It is not an error if the token is paused and an allowance adjustment is submitted.

The transaction must be signed by the owner's account and transaction fees will be paid by the owner only.

The allowance adjustment transaction will fail under the following circumstances:

- The `spender` account is the same as the owner's account.
- The `amount` will exceed the maximum supply of the token.
- The `spender`'s current allowance plus the `amount` will exceed the maximum supply of the token.
- The `spender`'s current allowance plus the `amount` will result in a negative number.
- The owner account is not associated with the specified token.
- The owner account does not own the specified NFT serial numbers.
- A serial number for an NFT does not exist.
- The token referenced in an NFT allowance is fungible.
- Duplicate crypto or fungible token allowances for a spender are specified.
- Duplicate NFT serial number allowances for a spender are specified.
- No allowances are specified. 

### Change CryptoTransfer to Support Approved Allowances

The existing CryptoTransfer API will be used to support the transfer of tokens by a `spender` under their approved allowance. The existing protobuf message for `CryptoTransfer` will be reused with one minor change to the `AccountAmount` and `NftTransfer` messages - the addition of an `is_approval` field to indicate whether the transfer involves an approved transfer or not.

```protobuf
// existing protobuf
message CryptoTransferTransactionBody {
	TransferList transfers = 1;
	repeated TokenTransferList tokenTransfers = 2;
}

// existing protobuf
message TransferList {
	repeated AccountAmount accountAmounts = 1;
}

// changed protobuf
message AccountAmount {
	// existing fields
	AccountID accountID = 1;
	sint64 amount = 2;
	
	// new field
	bool is_approval = 3;
}

// existing protobuf
message TokenTransferList {
	TokenID token = 1;
	repeated AccountAmount transfers = 2;
	repeated NftTransfer nftTransfers = 3;
}

// changed protobuf
message NftTransfer {
	// existing fields
	AccountID senderAccountID = 1;
   AccountID receiverAccountID = 2;
   int64 serialNumber = 3;
   
   // new field
   bool is_approval = 4;
}
```
To treat a transfer as an allowance transfer, we have to check if the transaction is signed by the debiting account. It is costly to expand signatures and verify this again during the balance adjustments. So to help us avoid this, a new boolean flag `isApproval` is added to the `AccountAmount` and `NftTransfer` messages which denote that the transfer has to be treated as allowance transfer if it set to `true`. This gives a lot of flexibility now as a transaction can contain a list of regular transfers and approved transfers, each potentially referencing a different token and/or owner.

The `is_approval` field must be set to `true` for transfers that will involve an approved allowance otherwise a regular transfer will be assumed. For hbar and fungible transfers the `is_approval` field must be set on the debiting `AccountAmount` while for NFTs the `is_approval` field is set on the transfer message itself. Multiple owner accounts can be involved in a single transfer by setting `is_approval` to `true` for each of the owner `AccountAmount` messages.

The spender (acting here as the caller) must sign the transaction. The owner of the token (the party that approved the spender's allowance) is not required to sign the transaction.

The transaction fees will be paid from the caller's account and not the owner's. This behavior is similar to regular crypto/token transfers as well as Ethereum-based ERC20 tokens transferred under `transferFrom`.

Custom fees are charged in exactly the same manner as regular transfers are.

- If `net_of_transfers` is enabled for fractional fees, the recipient will receive the complete `amount` during the transfer; otherwise a portion of the `amount` will be deducted from the recipient.
- The limit for multi-level custom fees still remains at 2 with no cycles permitted (other than the case of a token paying fees in its own units).

The spender's token allowance with the owner will be decreased by the transfer `amount` and will **not** include the customFees involved in the transfer. If the transfer `amount` will decrease the spender's allowance to zero, this transaction will effectively remove the spender's allowance from the owner’s account.

If NFTs are transferred, the relevant serial numbers will be removed from the spender's NFT allowance with the owner. If the transfer will result in an empty NFT allowance list, this transaction will effectively remove the spender's NFT allowance from the owner's account.

The transfer transaction will fail under the following circumstances:

- The `accountID` sending and receiving the token cannot be the same address.
- The recipient account does not have an association with the token yet.
	- If the recipient account has auto-association enabled, at least one open slot must be available for the transfer to succeed.
- The recipient account has `receiverSigRequired` enabled and the recipient has not signed the transaction.
- The owner account does not have `amount` of token available.
- The transfer `amount` plus custom fixed fees will exceed the total amount of token available.
- The spender does not have an allowance established with the owner for the specified token.
- The `amount` to transfer exceeds the spender's available allowance.
- An NFT serial number is being transferred and the owner does not have possession of it.
- Either the owner or recipient accounts are frozen for the specified token.
- The specified `token` is paused.

### Change TransactionRecord to Contain Current Allowance Balance

The current balance for hbar and token allowances will be added to the `TransactionRecord` message. This information is required for the mirror node to track the correct allowances for a spender. The mirror node will have the allowances granted in a `CryptoApproveAllowance` but these values will not be modified on an on-going basis as `CryptoTransfer` transactions are executed, hence if adjustments are applied as deltas the mirror node will have an incorrect allowance value after `CryptoAdjustAllowance`.

```protobuf
message TransactionRecord {
	// existing fields
	TransactionReceipt receipt = 1;
	bytes transactionHash = 2;
	Timestamp consensusTimestamp = 3;
	TransactionID transactionID = 4;
	string memo = 5;
	uint64 transactionFee = 6;
	oneof body {
		ContractFunctionResult contractCallResult = 7;
		ContractFunctionResult contractCreateResult = 8;
	}
	TransferList transferList = 10;
	repeated TokenTransferList tokenTransferLists = 11;
	ScheduleID scheduleRef = 12;
	repeated AssessedCustomFee assessed_custom_fees = 13;
	repeated TokenAssociation automatic_token_associations = 14;
	Timestamp parent_consensus_timestamp = 15;
	bytes alias = 16;
	
	// new fields
	repeated CryptoAllowance crypto_adjustments = 17;
	repeated NftAllowance nft_adjustments = 18;
	repeated TokenAllowance token_adjustments = 19;
}
```

The `crypto_adjustments`, `nft_adjustments` and `token_adjustments` fields will be populated for `CryptoAdjustApproval` transactions only and will contain the absolute/current value of the altered adjustments.

## Backwards Compatibility

The CryptoGetInfo query will return the same account information as before plus the newly added fields `crypto_allowances`, `nft_allowances` and `token_allowances`. Clients that are not interested in the account's approved allowances can safely ignore these fields.

The CryptoApproveAllowance and CryptoAdjustAllowance transactions are new additions to the API and will not have any backward compatibility issues to address.

The CryptoTransfer transaction is not incurring any API/signature changes but the backend implementation is being changed to accommodate the proposed allowance/approval mechanism. Transactions submitted by the spender that seek to utilize the allowance feature before the feature is enabled will fail validation since the owner has not signed the transaction. Once the feature is enabled, regular transfers will still be handled in the same manner and spender approved transfers will also be permitted.

## Security Implications

The approved allowances APIs discussed herein were inspired by ERC-20. The attack vector related to the ERC-20 `approve()` method is not relevant to the Hedera implementation since the former's vulnerability is the result of possible transaction ordering by the miner while the Hedera hashgraph consensus protocol does not permit reordering of transactions.

## Rejected Ideas

### Introduce New API for Querying Allowances

The initial proposal introduced a new query API that was similar to the ERC-20 `allowance()` method. While copying this method in the Hedera API would make for an easier transition for Ethereum developers, many Hedera engineers felt that the API should be more minimal and existing calls reused as much as possible.

### Introduce New API for Approved Transfers

The initial proposal introduced a new transaction API for transferring tokens that would support an approved transfer list. This API would only allow a spender to submit approved transfers and did not include regular crypto or token transfers. During design review several Hedera engineers felt that there should only be a single transfer API rather than two. Upon further inspection it was found that the current CryptoTransfer message format could support approved transfers in addition to regular transfers.

### Support One Allowance in Approval API

The approval API introduced in the initial proposal only permitted one allowance to be specified via a `oneof`, either an hbar or a token allowance. During internal design reviews, it was felt that since the `oneof` was the only field in the `CryptoApproveAllowanceTransactionBody` message, it would make more sense to separate the `CryptoAllowance` and `TokenAllowance` messages into distinct transaction body messages. However, doing so would necessitate a similar change to the `CryptoAdjustAllowanceTransactionBody` message to maintain the pattern of separating the hbar and token actions. An alternate solution was proposed to allow `CryptoApproveAllowanceTransactionBody` to specify both hbar and token approvals (as lists) within a single transaction. This approach also permits the caller to specify multiple approvals in bulk rather than issuing many calls.

## Open Issues

## References

- [ERC20 Specification](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/standards/tokens/erc-20/)
- [ERC20 API](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/2.x/api/token/erc20)
- [ERC721 API](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/2.x/api/token/erc721)

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
