---
hip: 376
title: Support Approve/Allowance/transferFrom standard calls from ERC20 and ERC721
author: Stoyan Panayotov <stoyan.panayotov@limechain.tech>
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Accepted
last-call-date-time: 2022-04-06T07:00:00Z
created: 2022-03-02
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/378
requires: 206, 218, 336
updated: 2022-04-19
---

## Abstract

Describe the added support for industry standart `ERC20` and `ERC721` functions related to token approvals and allowances in Hedera's Smart Contract Service.

## Motivation

The goal is to expose [HIP-336](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-336): Approval and Allowance API for Tokens functionality in industry standard `ERC-20` and `ERC-721` calls for smart contract developers on Hedera.

## User stories

### Fungible token related stories

As a hedera smart contract services user, I want to enable another user or contract the ability to spend `x` fungible tokens from my account so that they can trade on my behalf without requiring that I expose my private key to them.

As a hedera smart contract services user, I want to query tokens for the current token allowances that have been granted to a user (spender) for a specific owner account.

As a hedera smart contract services user, I want to modify or remove an allowance I have granted to another user or contract so that I can manage that user/contract's ability to spend my tokens over time.

As a hedera smart contract services user that has been granted an allowance, I want to be able to  transfer tokens owned by the owner account as if they were my tokens so that I can issue transfers on their behalf without them having to expose their private key.

### Non-fungible token related stories

As a hedera smart contract services user, I want to enable another user the ability to spend specific non-fungible tokens from my account so that they can trade on my behalf without requiring that I expose my private key to them.

As a hedera smart contract services user, I want to enable or disable another user the ability to spend all instances of a particular non-fungible token that I currently or may in the future hold in my account so that they can trade on my behalf without requiring that I expose my private key to them.

As a hedera smart contract services user, I want to modify or remove an allowance I have granted to another user so that I can manage that user's ability to spend my tokens over time.

As a hedera smart contract services user, I want to query a token for the information whether an account has approve for all nfts permission.

As a hedera smart contract services user that has been granted an allowance, I want to be able to  transfer tokens owned by the owner account as if they were my tokens so that I can issue transfers on their behalf without them having to expose their private key.

## Specification

### EVM Precompile

Extend the functionality from [HIP-218](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-218): Smart Contract interactions with Hedera Token Accounts with support for `approve`, `allowance` and `transferFrom` functions.

#### Supported ERC-20 operations

Tokens of type `FUNGIBLE_COMMON` support standard `ERC-20` calls.

The following `ERC-20` operations will be supported. Standard `ERC-20 Events` will be emitted as appropriate.

- `function allowance(address owner, address spender) external view returns (uint256);`
- `function approve(address spender, uint256 amount) external returns (bool);`
- `function transferFrom(address sender, address recipient, uint256 amount) external returns (bool);`

#### Supported ERC-721 operations

Tokens of type `NON_FUNGIBLE_UNIQUE` will support standard `ERC-721` calls.

The following `ERC-721` operations will be supported. Standard `ERC-721 Events` will be emitted as appropriate.

  - `function approve(address _approved, uint256 _tokenId) external payable`
  - `function setApprovalForAll(address _operator, bool _approved) external`
  - `function getApproved(uint256 _tokenId) external view returns (address)`
  - `function isApprovedForAll(address _owner, address _operator) external view returns (bool)`
  - `function transferFrom(address _from, address _to, uint256 _tokenId) external payable`

#### ERC20 and ERC721 mapping to the HAPI interface

There are several differences in the way `ERC20` and `ERC721` functions are designed to behave and the way HAPI transactions for `approve`, `allowance` and `transferFrom` are implemented in Hedera. This section describes the integration between the function specifications and the actual Hedera behaviour.

##### ERC20 approve and HAPI Adjust allowance

ERC20 `approve` function works by overriding the previous value (if any was set) for the 'spender' address specified.
HAPI `CryptoAdjustAllowance` transactions work by applying the difference specified by the `amount` field in the transaction body to the existing allowance (or 0 if there is no existing allowance approved for that account).
Calling ERC20 `approve` with amount `200` will be implemented in the following way in the precompile:
 - query the current configured allowance for the `owner`, `spender` and `tokenId`
 - calculate the adjustment that needs to be made to have the final allowance equal to the amount received as argument to the ERC20 `approve`
 - create a `CryptoAdjustAllowance` tx with the calculated adjustment

##### ERC721 approve and multiple approved accounts for NFT in Hedera

ERC721 is designed in such a way that an NFT can have either 0 or 1 approvals e.g. if Alice owns NFT 'X' and Alice calls the approve function two times, once with Bob's account and once with Carol's account, the second call to approve will override Bob's allowance and only Carol will have approved allowance for that NFT. In Hedera the behaviour is different and both Bob and Carol would have approved allowances after the second call to approve.
To make sure there is no unexpected result for smart contract developers working with HTS tokens, ERC721 `approve` and `getApproved` will behave in the following way with HTS tokens:
When `approve` is called:
 - first we'll check if the address from the function arguments is the zero address
 - if yes, then we'll iterate through the account's `GrantedNFTAllowances` and revoke (adjust with -) any existing approvals for the NFT serial number
 - if no, then we'll check if the owner account has exactly 0 existing approvals for that NFT serial number
 - if yes, we'll add the approval
 - if no, then we revert and require HAPI manipulation of approvals

When `getApproved` is called:
 - we'll check whether the owner account has exactly zero or one approvals granted for that NFT serial number
 - if yes, we'll return either zero (specifying there are no approvals) or the address of the approved account
 - if no, then we revert and require HAPI manipulation of approvals

##### HAPI payer, allowance and signatures for transferFrom

HAPI cryptoTransfer functions using allowance work with the transaction payer - this is the account that should have allowance to spend the tokens. 
ERC transferFrom functions work with msg.sender and that is the account that will be verified in the context of a precompile. 
Additionaly, in HAPI TX context, the spender account must have signed the transaction for the transfer to be valid. We have already introduced an exception for signatures verification in the case when the `owner` and the `initiator` of a transfer through the precompile are the same account. This exception will now be extended to also include the `spender` of an allowance.

#### Gas Schedule

For function calls that cause HTS token transfers the appropriate gas charges will be applied. Calls that emit events will be charged the event fees too.

We take the canonical max calls per second, and divide that into the 15MM gas per second, and add a 20% premium. The trick is figuring out which max TPX measure to use.

| Function         | Base Cost |  Incremental Cost |
| -----------------| --------: | ----------------: |
| Queries          |    xx Gas |             0 Gas |
| Approves         |    xx Gas |             0 Gas |
| Transfer         |    xx Gas |             0 Gas |

## Backwards Compatibility

The existing functions in the HTS precompile will remain in place, all prior usages of the precompile will function as they did before.

## Security Implications

The same implications relating to contract keys and delegate calls outlined in HIP-206 also apply to the direct support of ERC-20 and ERC-721 contracts.

## How to Teach This

Tutorials and SDK examples should be written showing how solidity can access the token accounts directly as ERC-20 and ERC-721 contracts.

HSCS documentation should be updated to explicitly enumerate the supported and non-supported contract functions.

## Reference Implementation

// TODO

## Rejected Ideas


## Open Issues

None at this time.

## References

- [ERC-20: Token Standard](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-20)
- [ERC-721: Non-Fungible Token Standard](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-721)
- [HIP-218: Smart Contract interactions with Hedera Token Accounts](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-218)
- [HIP-336: Approval and Allowance API for Tokens](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-336)

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
