---
hip: 867
title: Add Smart Contract Services Support for KZG Point Evaluation Precompiled Function
author: Danno Ferrin (@shemnon)
working-group: Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@nana-ec>. David Bakin <@david-bakin-sl>
requested-by: EVM Developers
type: Standards Track
category: Core
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Final
release: 0.50.1
last-call-date-time: 2024-03-06T07:00:00Z
created: 2024-01-24
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/872
updated: 2024-06-24
---

## Abstract

Add the Ethereum KZG Point Evaluation Precompile from EIP-4844: Shard Blob
Transactions.

## Motivation

One part of [EIP-4844](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4844) is the KZG Point
Evaluation function, a cryptographic precompile that can be used with zero
knowledge proofs as well as proving that certain subsections of a blob are
present without introducing the entire blob. This precompile adds value to the
other parts of EIP-4844, but it does not require them. Hedera will expose
support for this precompile without introducing other parts of the EIP.

## Rationale

While Hedera will not be supporting most EIP-4844 features the KZG Point
Evaluation Precompile is cleanly severable from the other integrated features.
This precompile, when accompanied by the associated trusted setup, can be viewed
as a cryptographic primitive similar to ECDSA. The ability to prove subsets of
hashed data provides unique functionality not found in other cryptographic
precompiles. Ethereum apps may use the KZG features without any interation with
blob varying transactions, and it makes sense to allow Hedera Smart Contract
apps the same latitude.

This precompile will be brought in with the same semantics and calling
conventions as Ethereum Mainnet. It also requires a customizable data file known
as the trusted setup. For maximum compatibility the same trusted setup from
Ethereum Mainnet will be used.

## User stories

* As a smart contract developer I want to use the EIP-4844 Point Evaluation
  Precompile in my smart contract applications.

## Specification

There are no changes needed to Hedera Services and the JSON-RPC relay.

### EVM Implementation

The [KZG Point Evaluation precompile](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4844#point-evaluation-precompile)
will be implemented as it is in EIP-4844.

The address for the precompile will be the same as Ethereum
Mainnet (`0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000A`).

The point evaluation will use the
same [trusted setup](https://github.com/ethereum/c-kzg-4844/blob/main/src/trusted_setup.txt)
as Ethereum Mainnet.

This is the same out-of-the-box setup provided by the Besu EVM library, there
should be little to zero Hedera code needed to enable this.

## Backwards Compatibility

The core EVM library shipping with Hedera as of version 0.46 already contains
the needed EVM support. The activation will add a new Hedera EVM version that
will activate all the Cancun support in one release. The precompile should
automatically be part of the Besu EVM Library implementation.

## Security Implications

It is expected the gas cost of the precompile will fall in line with compute
usage during the execution. Performance tests will need to be executed to
process that heavy use of the precompile matches this expectation.

## How to Teach This

User documentation that discusses available precompiled contracts will need to
be updated to reflect the presence of this precompile. Because this is a feature
using cutting edge cryptography there should be no need for tutorials.
References to Ethereum specifications may be useful, but it is expected users
using this feature will already be familiar with the function.

## Reference Implementation

The Besu EVM Library uses
the [Java bindings for c-kzg-4844](https://github.com/ethereum/c-kzg-4844/blob/main/bindings/java/README.md).

## Rejected Ideas

The only two ideas granted serious consideration were either full inclusion of
the feature or full exclusion of the feature. The idea of doing our own trusted
setup would (a) provide incompatibilities with developer tools, (b) be
time-consuming or (c) lack credible neutrality.

The decision to include the precompile over exclusion is predicated on the
anticipation that some zero knowledge systems will be able to use the
precompile.

## Open Issues

// none

## References

* [c-kgz-4844](https://github.com/ethereum/c-kzg-4844) reference implementation
* [EIP-4844](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4844): Shard Blob Transactions

A collections of URLs used as references through the HIP.

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
