---
hip: 994
title: New Native Schema Registry Service
author: Justin Atwell <@justin-atwell>
working-group: Wes Geisenberger <@dubgeis>, Justin Atwell <@justin-atwell>, Cyndy Montgomery <@dontknowityet>
requested-by: Swirlds Labs
type: Service
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Draft
last-call-date-time: 
created: 2024-07-11
discussions-to: 
updated: 2024-07-11
---

## Abstract

This document outlines the development of a Web3 Schema Registry. It addresses the need for many data items stored or shared on-chain or around DLT technologies to be used programmatically across a number of business/industry verticals and aims to improve the reuse and accessibility of data stored in HCS/IPFS and other locations.

## Motivation

**Unstructured / Unvalidated Messages on HCS :** Many messages stored on HCS are data elements of a supply chain or other similar use case (Sustainability). There is a need for many of these messages to be used in different systems programmatically.

**Token Metadata:** In many scenarios, it would be beneficial for Token metadata that is stored on-chain or near-chain in IPFS, etc to be also read programmatically in many use cases. From NFT collections to semi-fungible tokens alongside issued tokens to ESG platforms and RWAs.

**Cross-chain data interchange:** We are seeing a rise in systems that need to operate cross-chain or have elements shared/visible beyond their own network. The ability to have this data validated or parseable by many systems is becoming a strict requirement.

**The ability to have a single source of truth of an Objects Structure:** Having an on-chain location to have immutable data definitions or schemas for objects ensures more transparency, and exchange of data and gives our whole ecosystem more utility across many web2 and web3 use cases.

**Benefits:**

* Provides a decentralized location to manage and validate schemas for Tokens and Topics.
* Allows Sustainability assets to be Auditable, Data Discoverable and Liquid.
* Enables new products and business models on HCS.
* Offers a proven method of validating data prior to saving (pre-consensus validation).
* Enhances the utility of HCS and HTS within Hedera.
* Brings the look and feel of big data to Hedera.
* Enables simple facilitation of holding and spending tokens to document new information on a topic.


## Specification



## Example

## Backwards Compatibility



## Security Implications

### Fees



### Throttling



## How to Teach This



## Reference implementation



## Rejected Ideas



## Open Issues


## References

- [IWA Specification](https://github.com/InterWorkAlliance/TokenTaxonomyFramework/blob/main/token-taxonomy.md)

## Copyright
This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
