---
hip: 542
title: Payer-sponsored auto-account creation with HTS assets
author: Michael Tinker (@tinker-michaelj)
working-group: Neeha Sompalli (@Neeharika-Sompalli), Ali Katamjani (ali@swirldslabs.com)
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Accepted
last-call-date-time: 2022-09-07T07:00:00Z
created: 2022-08-08
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/541
requires: 32
updated: 2022-08-24, 2022-09-06, 2022-09-20
---

## Abstract

[HIP-32](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-32) defined a new way to create a Hedera account by submitting a `CryptoTransfer` 
that sends hbar to a protobuf representation of a key called an _alias_.

When an account is not already using the alias, **and** the sent hbar is enough to cover the account creation fee, then 
the network creates a new account with the key implied by the alias. It deducts the account creation fee from 
the sent hbar, and the new account's balance is the remaining hbar. 

Thus auto-account creation does not work if sending only a unit of a fungible token or an NFT to a new alias, 
because HTS assets may not have fees deducted from them. 

We propose to support auto-creation via HTS assets by charging the account creation fee to the payer of the triggering 
`CryptoTransfer`. This means a new alias may be given anywhere in the transaction; both in the hbar transfer list, or in 
an HTS token transfer list. In the latter case, the assessed creation fee will include at least one auto-association slot, 
since the new account must be associated to its originating HTS assets.

**IMPORTANT:** We do _not_ propose to make nodes do extra work in precheck estimating implied auto-creation fees. These
fees will be assessed as part of the `CryptoTransfer` service logic; and, as with all other service fees, will not be 
estimated in precheck.

## Motivation

Allowing auto-creation with token assets makes the network match the expectations of Ethereum users, since Ethereum 
contracts allow ERC-20 and ERC-721 assets be transferred to an externally operated account (EOA) even _before_ that 
account has been created by sending it value. 

## Rationale

We cannot provide free account creation, for the same DOS risks outlined in HIP-32. There is also no reasonable way to 
convert HTS token units or NFTs into hbar. Therefore, a solution to extend `CryptoTransfer` auto-creation to 
HTS assets is to deduct the account creation fee from the `CryptoTransfer` payer.

## User stories

- As an NFT creator, I want to send an NFT to an onboarding collector, given only their public key. 
- As a dApp operator, I want to send my native token to an onboarding user in a single transaction; rather
than first submitting a `CryptoCreate`, then a `TokenAssociate`, then a `CryptoTransfer`.
  
## Specification

The technical specification for this HIP requires three changes in the network:
 - Instead of returning `INVALID_ACCOUNT_ID` when a `CryptoTransfer` attempts to credit a new alias
 with a non-hbar asset, run the same auto-creation logic that runs today when crediting a new alias with hbar.
 - Instead of deducting the account creation fee from the assets being transferred to a new 
alias, charge this creation fee to the `CryptoTransfer` payer account.
 - When a new alias receives _n_ different types of HTS assets, create the synthetic `CryptoCreate` 
transaction with `maxAutoAssociationSlots=n`.

## Backwards Compatibility

Any existing clients that use auto-creation need to be sure the payer account for the 
`CryptoTransfer` can afford an account creation fee, since this fee will no longer be deducted
from the auto-created account's initial balance. 

## Security Implications

This HIP does not change the charging and throttling protections used to secure auto-creation as added in HIP-32. 
So we do not perceive any new security implications.

## How to Teach This

"Auto-create an account by sending HTS assets to its desired alias."

## Reference Implementation

Please follow [this issue](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/issues/3763) for progress
on the reference implementation.

## Rejected Ideas

We briefly considered requiring a simultaneous hbar payment upon auto-creation with HTS assets, but this would have
eliminated most of the usability gains intended with the HIP.

## Open Issues

A future HIP should propose extending the `tokenTransfer` system precompile to support auto-creation via non-hbar assets.

## References

- [HIP-32](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-32)
- [Reference implementation tracker](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/issues/3763)

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
