---
hip: 1126
title: "Delete Allowance without Token Association"
author: Michael Heinrichs <@netopyr>
working-group:
requested-by: GitHub issue https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-consensus-node/issues/17441
type: "Standards Track"
category: "Service"
needs-council-approval: "Yes"
status: "Draft"
created: 2025-02-17
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-consensus-node/issues/17441
updated: 2025-02-24
requires: 
replaces: 
superseded-by: 
---

## Abstract
To remove an allowance for a token, the token must be associated with the account.
This is an unnecessary burden with no advantages.
This HIP proposes to allow the removal of allowances without requiring the token to be associated.

## Motivation
If a user wants to remove an allowance for a token without an association, one has to associate the token, remove the allowance, and dissociate the token again.
This is a cumbersome and expensive process with no benefits.
A user may decide to keep the allowances instead, which wastes resources and risks hitting the limit of allowed allowances.

While it makes sense to associate the token before giving a non-zero allowance, it does not make sense that the token must be associated in order for the allowance to be removed.

## Rationale
`CryptoDeleteAllowance` is used to delete allowances on NFTs. Once this HIP is implemented, it does not require the owner to have an association with the token.

To delete the allowance of a fungible token, a user has to send a `CryptoApproveAllowance` with an amount of `0`. After this HIP is implemented, the owner does not require an association with the fungible token to execute this transaction.

## User stories
1. As a user, I want to remove an allowance without having to associate the token with my account first.

## Specification
This change requires no changes to the HAPI or the record stream/block stream.

## Backwards Compatibility
This HIP is fully backward compatible. It does not change the behavior of any existing functionality except for allowing the deletion of allowances in previously forbidden cases.

## Security Implications
There are no security implications. Removing an allowance imposes no security risk.

## How to Teach This
The `CryptoDeleteAllowance` and `CryptoApproveAllowance` documentation should be updated to reflect the new behavior.

## Copyright/license
This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
