---
hip: 639
title: Errata records
author: Michael Tinker <@tinker-michaelj>
working-group: Steven Sheehy <@steven-sheehy>, Nick Poorman <@nickpoorman>, Neeharika Sompalli <@Neeharika-Sompalli>, Xin Li <@xin-hedera>
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Accepted
last-call-date-time: 2023-01-19T07:00:00Z
created: 2022-11-29
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/634
updated: 2023-01-19
---

## Abstract

A bug in the consensus nodes can cause them to export bad data in the record stream, so we need a way 
to issue errata records. There many categories of bugs and resulting bad data, and not all of them can 
be fixed by simply correcting the record stream. Consider the following examples:
  1. _(Missing record)_ The network handles a transaction correctly, but fails to write its record to 
  the stream.
  2. _(Inconsistent record)_ The network fails while handling a transaction, with no effect on state, 
  but still exports a complete record.
  3. _(Incorrect record)_ The network handles a transaction and exports a consistent record; but the 
  handling itself was wrong.

In this HIP we propose a council-only `issueRecordStreamErrata` RPC to publish corrections to the record stream, 
including "compensating" actions that mirror nodes can take to bring their databases back in sync with the consensus 
node state. This will support "fixing" problems of type (1) and (2) above.

We do **NOT** propose any way for council accounts to change the consensus node state. So this HIP does
not provide any way to fix problems of type (3) above. As an extreme example, if some account `0.0.A` is
supposed to receive 10B hbar in a transaction, but a bug redirects those funds to account `0.0.B`, then it 
is cold comfort if the record stream consistently reflects the transaction. But preserving such comforts 
is all we aspire to here.

## Motivation

Although it should be extremely rare, it will always remain possible for bugs to cause consensus nodes to 
export bad data in the record stream. If this happens, we need a precise, highly visible way to issue an 
errata for mirror nodes. The proposal is that the super-majority of the council approves the errata file 
proposal, and the super-majority of consensus nodes (by stake) ratify the errata proposal.

## Rationale

The two main decision points in the design are:
  1. Whether to support "decorating" the record stream with errata sidecars _at the time errors occurred_.
  2. How to instruct mirror nodes to "compensate" for the side effects of an error.

### Errata sidecars

The benefit of errata sidecars is that if a mirror node syncs from a database snapshot before the error, 
it can avoid the error entirely, and simply use the correct record based on the sidecar. But mirror node 
sync times are sufficiently long that there is no practical reason to ever start a sync from any but the 
latest snapshot.  This means there is no practical benefit to decorating the stream with an errata at some 
time in the distant past, since no syncing node will ever "be there" to appreciate it. (It is also unclear 
how a syncing node would be able to process signatures on an errata sidecar, since the signatures could 
come from keys in a future address book that the syncing node knows nothing about.) Therefore we chose not 
to support errata sidecars.

### Compensating actions

There are many techniques we could use to instruct mirror nodes to correct their databases at the consensus 
time of the `RecordStreamErrataTransactionBody`. The ideal technique would have the expressiveness of 
ANSI SQL. But mirror nodes are free to use any form of database and schema they like, so some mirror node 
developers might face great difficulty in supporting a SQL-like language that assumes a different schema.
We chose to use synthetic transactions to define compensating actions because mirror nodes must already
support transactions. The weakness of this choice is that we can imagine a bug whose side effects cannot
be "fixed" by any sequence of synthetic transactions. If such a bug occurred, we would be forced to add
a more general compensating strategy to the `RecordStreamErrataTransactionBody`.

## User stories

- As a network operator, I want to publish a precise, maximally visible errata to the record stream after 
a bug in the consensus nodes has caused an error.
- As a mirror node operator, I want a trustworthy source of record stream errata that will automatically
bring my mirror node database back in sync with consensus node state.
  
## Specification

We propose a new `TransactionBody` type,
```
message RecordStreamErrataTransactionBody {
    // The (past) consensus time at which an export error occurred
    Timestamp consensus_time_of_error = 1;

    // The data that should have been exported (unset if no data should have 
    // been exported); allows mirror nodes to fix transaction history tables
    RecordStreamItem correct_item = 2;

    // One or more synthetic transactions whose side effects, when incorporated
    // in the mirror node database in the normal way, will bring its present state
    // back in alignment with the consensus node state; these items must NOT
    // be inserted in any transaction history tables
    repeated RecordStreamItem compensating_items = 3;
}
```

We suggest this transaction type be submitted using a `NetworkService` RPC  named 
`issueRecordStreamErrata`; and that it require a council payer account number (either 
`2` or `50`). 


## Backwards Compatibility

There is no existing errata feature to maintain backward compatibility with.

## Security Implications

It would be very bad  if an unauthorized account was able to issue record stream errata. 
Even when the network limits this ability to council, there is a material risk 
of human error in constructing the `RecordStreamErrataTransactionBody`. This risk should 
be acceptable, however, since if operators issue an incorrect errata for time `T1` at 
time `T2`, they can correct that mistake at `T3` by issuing _another_ errata for time 
`T1` whose `compensating_items` at `T3` take into account the effects of the 
`compensating_items` applied at `T2`.

## How to Teach This


## Reference Implementation

TBD

## Rejected Ideas

As noted in the Rationale section, we considered but did not propose:
  1. Inserting an errata side car into the stream at the consensus time of an error.
  2. Defining a general way to specify mirror nodes database changes.

## Open Issues

TBD

## References

TBD

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
