---
hip: 350
title: Add Random Number Create Transaction
author: Jaewook Kim <cmdhema@gmail.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Draft
last-call-date-time:
created: 22.02.05
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/350
---

## Abstract

Many Decentralized Applications require random number generation.
However, doing completely trustless random number generation is not easy.
I propose a new 'RandomNumberCreateTransaction' to prove that a random number to be used in Hedera's dapp is a trustless random number generated through Hedera's distributed network.

## Motivation

Random Number is widely used in applications such as Game and Lottery, but in particular these days, in order to randomly select one of the numerous NFTs mined in the NFT project and transmit it to the NFT buyer.

For example, in the case of Ethereum, SmartContract creates a random number in various ways or uses Chainlink's VRF.

In creating and deploying NFTs without Hedera's SmartContract, it would be very difficult to show that the numbers were randomly generated in a trustless environment.

Therefore, I propose a new Transaction implementation that generates a random number.

## Rationale


## User stories

- It can be used in the developer's centralized application by calling the independent 'RandomNumberCreateTransaction'.

- In a function such as NFTTransfer, you can use a randomly generated serial.
## Specification

## Backwards Compatibility

## Security Implications

## How to Teach This

## Reference Implementation

## Rejected Ideas

## Open Issues

No blocking issues are known at this time.

## References


## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
