---
hip: 0000
title: Extending HTS with NFT support
author: Daniel Ivanov (@Daniel-K-Ivanov)
type: Service
status: Draft
created: 2021-04-22
discussions-to: TODO
---

## Abstract

The HIP defines the changes that must be applied in order for Hedera Services to support Non-fungible tokens.

## Motivation

The growing demand and use-cases for tokenisation point out that the current HTS design does not support all of the needs of the community. In this HIP we would like to describe a set of changes that would enable non-fungible types of tokens to be issues natively on Hedera Hashgraph. Having support for such tokens enable additional applications to be built on top of HTS.

## Rationale

Since developers desire the tokenization APIs to look similar for both fungible and non-fungible tokens, it is worth considering creating a single set of APIs that work for both.

Though fungible and non-fungible tokens are different, there are a lot of commonalities - eg admin keys, KYC, supply, mint and burn behaviours. 

## Specification

Based on the [IWA specification](https://github.com/InterWorkAlliance/TokenTaxonomyFramework) we can distinguish the following combinations of fungible and non-fungible tokens:

```
 HTS
│
└─── Fungible
│   └─── Fractional
│   └─── Whole         
└─── Non-Fungible
    └─── Whole              
    └─── Fractional
    └─── Singleton    
```

### Fungible

Tokens that have interchangeable value with one another, where any quantity of them has the same value as another equal quantity if they are in the same class or series 

#### Fractional
Describes a token that can be divided into smaller fractions, represented as decimals. The current version of HTS supports these types of tokens. They can be implicitly defined and created by setting `decimals != 0`. 

#### Whole
Describes a token that cannot be divided into smaller fractions. Meaning that subdivision is not allowed - just whole number quantities. Current version of HTS supports these types of tokens. They can be implicitly defined and created by setting `decimals=0`.

### Non-fungible
The NFT type is not interchangeable with other tokens of the same type as they typically have different values. 

#### Whole
Each instance of a token in the class can share some property values with other tokens in the class and have distincly unique values between them. They cannot be divided into smaller fractions, represented as decimals.

#### Fractional
Similar to `Whole` in terms that each instance of a token in the class can share some property values with other tokens in the class and have distincly unique values between them, but compared to `Whole`, they CAN be divided into smaller fractions.

#### Singleton
There can only be one instance in the deployed token class and that instance is indivisible. Useful when there is an asset or object to be tokenized that shares no properties or values with any other object.

## HAPI Changes

Described below are the set of changes that must be applied to the HTS API in order to support the described types above as-well as the additional operations and message types that should be added.

### Modification of current HAPI messages

The following protobuf messages to be changed.
#### TokenCreateTransactionBody

1. Introduce new `TokenType` enum and add `TokenType tokenType` to `TokenCreateTransactionBody`
```
//Fungible or Non-Fungible Token Base. Cannot be updated using admin key
enum TokenType {
	FUNGIBLE = 0;
	NON_FUNGIBLE = 1;
}
```
2. Add `uint64 maxSupply`. The property cannot be updated using admin key.
Applicability:
   - Fungible: Maximum number of fungible tokens that can be in circulation
   - Non-fungible: Maximum number of NFTs (serial numbers) that can be minted.


```

```

#### TokenMintTransactionBody

#### TransactionReceipt

#### TokenBurnTransactionBody

#### TokenWIpeAccountTransactionBody

#### TokenInfo

#### TokenTransferList

### New HAPI Messages

### Other

## Backwards Compatibility

## Security Implicattions

## How to Teach This

## Reference implementation

## Rejected Ideas

## Open Issues

## References

## Copyright/license

