---
hip: 865
title: Add EVM Support for transient storage and memory copy Cancun opcodes
author: Danno Ferrin (@shemnon)
working-group: Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@nana-ec>
requested-by: EVM Developers
type: Standards Track
category: Core
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Final
release: 0.50.1
last-call-date-time: 2024-03-06T07:00:00Z
created: 2024-01-24
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/872
updated: 2024-06-24
---

## Abstract

Update the Hedera network to add support for new Opcodes found in the Cancun
fork of
Ethereum Mainnet unrelated to EIP-4844 support, namely TSTORE, TLOAD, and MCOPY

## Motivation

Hedera's goal of EVM Equivalence also includes the requirement to stay
up-to-date with the current state of Ethereum Mainnet. This HIP addresses new
opcodes added to the EVM that do not address any features relating to Blobs, or
the Consensus Layer, or changes to existing opcodes.

## Rationale

The opcodes discussed in this HIP only exist within the EVM and do not interact
with any novel features of ethereum mainnet (such as blobs and CL beacon root).
The current version of Solidity may generate these opcodes with non-standard CLI
options. It is expected in the near future those options will be defaults. Other
languages are expected to follow a similar path with eventual implicit and
explicit use of these opcodes. Because of that we need to support them as
specified.

## User stories

* As a smart contract author, I want to be able to use transient storage
  features of solidity in my hedera smart contracts.
* As a smart contract author, I want to be able to use future versions of
  Solidity, Vyper, Fe, et al. that may use memory copying implicitly.
* As a smart contract author, I want to be able to explicitly use the memory
  copy features solidity may expose in future releases.

## Specification

### EVM Implementation

Two EIPs define the operational semantics of the added opcodes. For the
transient storage opcodes `TSTORE` and `TLOAD` they are defined
in [EIP-1153](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1153). For the `MCOPY`
operation they are defined
in [EIP-5656](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-5656).

The specified opcodes are to be implemented identically to Ethereum Mainnet and
as specified in their respective EIPs. This includes opcode numbers, gas
schedules, stack semantics, and new facilities such as transient storage added
to the execution frame.

## Backwards Compatibility

The core EVM library shipping with Hedera as of version 0.46 already contains
the needed EVM support. The activation will add a new Hedera EVM version that
will activate all the Cancun support in one release.

## Security Implications

Because the operations are being brought in with identical semantics there are
no security risks above those already present from existing Ethereum Equivalence
changes.

## How to Teach This

Any smart contract tutorials will want to examine the possibility of adding
sample contracts showcasing the use of transient storage and easy memory
copying. Ideally these could be sourced from existing Ethereum Tutorials as the
features are fairly well anticipated in the Ethereum community.

## Reference Implementation

// TBD

## Rejected Ideas

No ideas were rejected around these three opcodes, aside from not supporting
Cancun features.

The idea of supporting [EIP-4788](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4788):
Beacon block root in the EVM was rejected because there is no EL/CL separation
in Hedera. If we wanted to support similar hash storage ideas we would want to
mine a different address.

## Open Issues

// none

## References

* [EIP-1153](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1153): Transient storage opcodes
* [EIP-5656](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-5656): MCOPY - Memory copying
  instruction

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
