---
hip: 752
**title: Partitioning Functionality for Fungible Tokens on Hedera**
author: Sam Wood <sam.wood@toko.network>, Stephanie Yi <stephanie.yi@toko.network>, Eleonora Odorizzi <eleonora.odorizzi@toko.network>, Vicky Lio <vicky.lio@toko.network>
type: Standards Track
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Draft
created: 2023-06-07
discussions-to:
updated: 2023-06-21
---

## Abstract

This HIP proposes a backwards compatible addition of partitioning[^1] functionality to Hedera Fungible Tokens, allowing token issuers to:

* divide and manage tokens into “partitions” (separate groups or bundles);
* assign unique properties to the partitioned subset, including image URL or other metadata;
* transfer and manage tokens within each partition independently, effectively making them semi-fungible.

The proposed partitioning feature would address the limitations of fungible tokens and would offer greater flexibility, improved compliance, increased scalability, and a better user experience for token issuers across all industries. 


## Motivation

The proposed HIP introduces a partitioning feature to effectively and efficiently manage subsets of multiple fungible tokens within a single token ID, meeting business/compliance requirements and reducing overhead costs. 

At present, when referring to fungible supply:

* Fungible tokens are identical to one another, making it impossible to distinguish tokens within the supply. This limits their use to situations where uniformity and interchangeability are more important than individual token identity.
* The execution of native primitives[^2] on fungible tokens operates on the entire supply in a uniform manner. As such, any action or operation undertaken on these tokens will impact all other tokens in the supply equally, further emphasizing the indistinguishable nature of fungible tokens.

The partitioning feature would align with regulatory and compliance requirements of securities and derivatives, making it possible to attract more use cases and developers from “traditional finance” to the platform. Wallets and exchanges would display the partitioned fungible tokens as a single, unified entity, similar to how ERC-1155 collections are represented today. 

The partitioned fungible tokens would contain various types of tokens with different properties, characteristics, and use cases, all bundled together under a common identifier. 

This approach enables a seamless user experience and simplifies the management of diverse token types within a token ID, providing users with a familiar and consistent user interface similar to ERC-1155.

Overall, introducing the ability to partition fungible tokens would enable the Hedera network to better cater to multiple industries and would provide: 



1. **Flexibility** \
This would allow greater flexibility with potential access to new use cases and markets, allowing Hedera to meet the diverse needs of different industries and additional applications that the existing specifications and services for fungible tokens don't currently meet.
2. **Regulatory Compliance** \
Traditional financial institutions and enterprises often require a high level of regulatory compliance to ensure security, transparency, and accuracy that existing specifications and services do not address. 
3. **Scalability** \
The proposed partitioning functionality for Hedera Fungible Tokens improves scalability by allowing multiple tokens to be grouped and managed within a single token ID, rather than individually. This significantly reduces computational load and transaction costs, particularly for operations like metadata updates or token transfers that are executed at the partition level, as opposed to individual shares or units when modeled as an NFT. By reducing the number of transactions required for large-scale operations, this approach mitigates potential network congestion and ensures faster transaction processing, making partitioning an efficient solution for managing diverse token supplies at scale.
4. **User Experience** \
Partitioning would allow users to manage multiple tokens with different properties and specifications within the same supply, greatly improving user experience.

## Rationale

The partitioning of fungible tokens would offer significant benefits to token holders and Hedera network users providing greater flexibility in managing fungible tokens, opening up the opportunity to onboard more use cases and create new applications such as fractional ownership in real world assets and complex token mechanics for securities and derivatives. 

Additionally, partitioning would enable users to create custom fungible tokens with specific characteristics. For example, fungible tokens that represent a specific asset or commodity initially, can continue to be used throughout different stages of the asset or commodity’s life cycle, even as the asset or commodity evolves. Partitioning of tokens within the supply would be used to allow tokens within the same supply to move further down the token/asset lifecycle without impacting the entire supply. 

The implementation of this feature within the Hedera ecosystem necessitates a protocol layer solution, as opposed to a smart contract, due to the requirement for accurate representation of token ownership within the ecosystem's token explorers and wallets. Failure to incorporate this functionality at the protocol layer would result in the presentation of the smart contract address, rather than the investor's wallet address, as the purported token owner, which would be insufficient.

The concept of partitioning tokens is not entirely new, and is a well-accepted standard in other blockchain ecosystems. Ethereum's ERC-1410 standard provides a similar functionality, where a single fungible token can be broken down into partitions, each with its own state and holders. This allows for a more granular control and management of tokens, and enables a variety of use cases that are not possible with standard fungible tokens.

ERC-1410 allows for tokens to be subdivided into partitions and manipulated individually, while still maintaining their identity as part of the overall token supply. This feature is particularly beneficial for regulatory compliance, as it enables the token issuer to maintain precise control over the token supply and manage it in accordance with regulatory requirements.

The choice of partitioning logic over the typical ERC-1155 standard stems from the desire to provide a more comprehensive solution for managing various token types within a single token ID in Hedera. 

ERC-1155 does indeed allow for the grouping of different token types under a single contract address, but its functionality is somewhat limited. It does not provide a full specification for all necessary token functions, such as minting and burning. Instead, it anticipates the need for combining with other standards, such as ERC-20 for fungible tokens, to fully define these functions. 

While this might be suitable for Ethereum's more modular approach, it isn't sufficient for our needs on Hedera. We aim to create a more efficient and streamlined primitive that can handle various token types and functions within a single token ID, eliminating the need for multiple contract interactions and reducing complexity. 

By extending the Hedera Token Service with partitioning functionality, we can provide a more complete solution for token management. It would not only allow for the creation, minting, and burning of tokens, but also enable a more granular control over their distribution and transfer. This makes the proposed partitioning functionality a more comprehensive and flexible solution compared to the typical ERC-1155 standard.

## User Stories

AS A _Developer_,

I WANT to partition fungible tokens to efficiently manage subsets of tokens within a single token ID,

SO THAT I can reduce overhead costs and streamline token management in my application.

AS a _Token Issuer_, 

I WANT to create custom fungible tokens with specific characteristics by partitioning them,

SO THAT I can offer diverse and custom tokens to my users, all within a single token ID.

AS A _Token Issuer_, 

I WANT to be able to move tokens between partitions without the need to burn and mint new supply 

SO THAT the total supply of the token should remain unchanged.

AS A _Token Issuer_,

I WANT to be able to mint tokens into any existing partition 

SO THAT the newly minted tokens inherit the properties and specifications of the selected partition, and the total supply of the token increases accordingly.

AS A _Token Issuer_, 

I WANT to be able to burn tokens from any existing partition 

SO THAT the total supply of the token decreases accordingly.

AS an _Investor_,

I WANT to be able to purchase a fungible token that can represent different assets at different stages of its lifecycle,

SO THAT I can have flexibility in my investment portfolio.

AS an _Investor_,

I WANT the attributes, properties, and metadata of the token to be updated based on the specific partition it belongs to at any given point in time, 

SO THAT I can track the performance of each partition and make informed investment decisions.

AS a _Real estate fund manager_,

I WANT to be able to issue partitioned fungible tokens to represent rights to ownership or equity in real estate assets,

SO THAT I can offer investors the same token representing different assets at different times.  

AS a _Fund manager_,

I WANT to be able to sell the same token with a single token ID belonging to different partitions,

SO THAT tokens are assigned to partitions based on the assets they represents at different times of their lifecycle

AS a _Real estate developer_,

I WANT to be able to use partitioned fungible tokens to represent fractional ownership in real estate assets,

SO THAT I can offer investors a more accessible and liquid way to invest in property.

AS a_ Real estate developer_,

I WANT to be able to raise liquidity by selling partitions of fungible tokens that represent rights to ownership in a development, 

SO THAT I can receive funding while the development is still ongoing. 

AS a _Real estate developer_,

I WANT to be able to raise liquidity while selling use to use partitioned fungible tokens to represent rights to ownership

SO THAT tokens are later assigned to the partition representing the equity in a development that has completed.

AS a _Trader_, 

I WANT to be able to buy and sell partitioned fungible tokens on an exchange,

SO THAT I can buy and sell tokens from the single token ID belonging to different partitions with different monetary value.

AS a _User of a blockchain-based asset management platform_, 

I WANT to be able to easily manage multiple fungible tokens with different properties, specifications representing different items within a single supply, 

SO THAT I can track and manage my assets more effectively.

AS A _Token Holder_,

I WANT the partition details and attributes of tokens to be exposed in the wallet and public explorer

SO THAT token holders and external parties can easily access and verify token details and partition information.

## Specification

The introduction of the proposed feature to the Hedera Token Service API will enable users to partition their fungible tokens into groups with unique identifying features, including metadata and image URLs. The new function will include a default partition for tokens that do not belong to any of the created partitions. Additionally, any token will be assigned to only one partition, including the default one. This is a backwards compatible generalization of the Fungible Token service today, which becomes a partitioned fungible token with a default partition (partition 0). 

This partitioning ability will also provide the flexibility to add or remove tokens from each partition, making it easier to manage and use the tokens according to specific needs. The aggregate token supply shall be equivalent to the cumulative sum of the supplies across all partitions.

To ensure consistency in the functionality of the partitions, it is essential that the existing primitives, such as freeze, be implemented on the wallet level and applied across all partitions within the token and wallet. For instance, if a wallet contains multiple partitions, a freeze on that specific wallet should apply across all partitions within the token and the wallet, including the default partition (partition 0).

This implementation will provide a unified and simplified experience for users and developers, as it ensures that actions taken on a specific token within a partition are consistent across all partitions within the same wallet. Moreover, it eliminates the need for separate actions for each partition, which can be time-consuming and prone to errors.

As with other operations involving fungible tokens, the implementation of the proposed partitioning function necessitates the creation of the token with a partition key. This key will play a pivotal role in the signing of future partition transactions, ensuring that only authorized parties can carry out such actions. This is a critical security measure that is integral to the proposed partitioning function, and one that underscores the importance of robust authentication and authorization mechanisms in the management of digital assets.

Similar to the other keys in the Hedera Token Service, this key can be updated using the update token transaction. However, if the token does not currently have a partition key, the transaction will resolve to TOKEN_HAS_NO_PARTITION_KEY.

The partition key also allows the key holder to move a supply of tokens from one partition into another, while maintaining the respective token holder. This is an important primitive that facilitates securities use cases that explicitly disallow the burning of tokens. 

Token association will occur at the granular partition level. In the event that a partition number is not specified in the request, the wallet will be linked to the default partition, denoted as partition 0. It is worth noting that Hedera provides an innovative capability for accounts to proactively authorize a predetermined number of token association slots. These slots can be utilized for any tokens, eliminating the necessity for explicit associations. Consequently, each association established with a specific partition will consume one such slot from the pre-approved allocation. Attempting to associate with a partition that does not exist will result in an error of PARTITION_DOES_NOT_EXIST.

Partitions with a zero token supply can be removed from the token. However, when attempting to delete partitions that possess a non-zero supply, the operation will encounter an error flagged as NON_ZERO_PARTITION_SUPPLY. This error is designed to prevent the inadvertent deletion of partitions that still contain token supply, thereby ensuring data integrity and preventing potential inconsistencies within the token system.

## Implementation

```
message TokenCreateTransactionBody {
    ...
    Key pauseKey = 22; // The key which can pause the token. If empty, pause is not possible.
    Key partitionKey = 23; // [New] The key which can partition individual or fractional FTs. If empty, partitioning fractional FTs is not possible.
}

message TokenInfo {
    TokenPauseStatus pause_status = 24; // Specifies whether the token is paused or not. PauseNotApplicable is returned if pauseKey is not set.
    repeated PartitionInfo token_partitions = 26; // [New] Indicates the list of partitioned token amounts and their metadata.
}

message PartitionInfo {
    int64 partition_number = 1; // The unique identifier of this partition.
    uint64 token_amount = 2; // Amount in this partition.
    []byte metadata = 3; // Metadata of this partition.
}
```

```
// CreatePartition creates a new partition for `tokenID` .
func CreatePartition(tokenID hedera.TokenID, metadata []byte) (hedera.TransactionID, error) {
	// Create a new transaction to create the token partition
	tx, err := hedera.NewTokenPartitionTransaction().
		SetTokenID(tokenID).
		SetMetadata(metadata).
		Execute(client)

	if err != nil {
		return hedera.TransactionID{}, err
	}

	// Sign and submit the transaction
	txID, err := tx.GetTransactionID().Execute(client)
	if err != nil {
		return hedera.TransactionID{}, err
	}

	// Return the transaction ID
	return txID, nil
}

// MovePartition moves tokens from one partition to another within a wallet.
func MovePartition(tokenID hedera.TokenID, partitionNumberFrom int64, partitionNumberTo int64, amount int64, accountID hedera.AccountID) (hedera.TransactionID, error) {
	// Create a new transaction to move the token partition
	tx, err := hedera.NewTokenPartitionTransaction().
		SetTokenID(tokenID).
		SetPartitionNumberFrom(partitionNumberFrom).
		SetPartitionNumberTo(partitionNumberTo).
		SetAmount(amount).
		SetAccountID(accountID).
		Execute(client)

	if err != nil {
		return hedera.TransactionID{}, err
	}

	// Sign and submit the transaction
	txID, err := tx.GetTransactionID().Execute(client)
	if err != nil {
		return hedera.TransactionID{}, err

	}

	// Return the transaction ID
	return txID, nil
}

```

```
// Ability to set partition number(s) for token associations.
transaction, err := hedera.NewTokenAssociateTransaction().
        SetAccountID(accountId).
        SetTokenIDs(tokenId).
        SetPartitionNumber(7).
        SetPartitionNumber(8)
```

```

// Ability to delete partition(s) from the token.
transaction, err := hedera.NewDeletePartitionTransaction().
        SetTokenIDs(tokenId).
        SetPartitionNumber(7).
        SetPartitionNumber(8)
```

If either of the partition numbers do not exist within the token ID, it will result in an INVALID_PARTITION_NUMBER error. If the amount to be moved exceeds the amount currently in the “from” partition, it will result in a MOVE_EXCEEDS_AMOUNT_IN_PARTITION error.

The example below will transfer 10 tokens in partition number 7 from accountId1 to accountId2.

```
// Create the transfer transaction and freeze the transaction from further modification.
transaction, err := hedera.NewTransferTransaction().
        AddTokenTransfer(tokenId, accountId1, -10).
        SetPartitionNumber(7). // sets the “from” tokens from partition number 7.
        AddTokenTransfer(tokenId, accountId2, 10).
        FreezeWith(client)
```

The proposed enhancement to the Hedera fungible token transfer transaction mechanism allows for the explicit specification of the partition from which tokens are to be transferred. In the absence of such specification, the default partition (partition number 0) will be utilized. Furthermore, when a specific partition is specified during a transfer transaction, an identical partition number is also established in the receiving wallet, given that tokens in a partition share common metadata. This creates a more efficient and seamless process for managing tokens across partitions, while ensuring that metadata consistency is maintained throughout the transaction process.

Here’s a proposed list of methods that should support the addition of .SetPartitionNumber() parameter in the transaction:

1. NewTokenMintTransaction()
2. NewTransferTransaction()
3. NewTokenWipeTransaction()
4. NewTokenBurnTransaction()
5. NewTokenAssociateTransaction()
6. **NewTokenLockTransaction() [future feature from pending HIP-50]**
7. **NewTokenUnlockTransaction() [future feature from pending HIP-50]**

In order for this to be backwards compatible, if this is not set in these transactions, it defaults to the default partition (partition 0).

Table indicating primitive functionality and whether it’s applicable to partitions:


<table>
  <tr>
   <td>#
   </td>
   <td>Hedera Primitive 
   </td>
   <td>Applicable to Partitions
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>1
   </td>
   <td>Create Token
   </td>
   <td>No, partitions cannot be created with this transactions
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>2
   </td>
   <td>Mint Token
   </td>
   <td>Yes, partitions can be minted directly in within the partition
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>3
   </td>
   <td>Associate Token 
   </td>
   <td>Yes, partitions are associated separately
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>4
   </td>
   <td>Dissociate Token
   </td>
   <td>No, dissociate is done on the token ID level
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>5
   </td>
   <td>Transfer Token 
   </td>
   <td>Yes, the entire partition or fractional divisions within a partition can be transferred
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>6
   </td>
   <td>Freeze 
   </td>
   <td>No, freeze is done on the entire wallet account
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>7
   </td>
   <td>Unfreeze
   </td>
   <td>No, freeze is done on the entire wallet account
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>8
   </td>
   <td>Burn Token 
   </td>
   <td>Yes, burn can be done on the entire partition or fractional divisions within a partition
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>9
   </td>
   <td>Token Delete
   </td>
   <td>No, delete is done on the token ID level
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>10
   </td>
   <td>Wipe Token
   </td>
   <td>Yes, wipe can be done on the entire partition or fractional divisions within a partition 
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>11
   </td>
   <td>Threshold/Multi-sig accounts & transactions
   </td>
   <td>Yes, as with other transactions on tokens, these transactions that requires multiple signatures can also specify a partition number to operate on
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>12
   </td>
   <td>Option to set receiving signature required
   </td>
   <td>Yes, as with other transactions on tokens, these transactions that require a receiving signature can also specify a partition number to operate on
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>14
   </td>
   <td>Token Pause
   </td>
   <td>No, pause is done on the token ID level
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>15
   </td>
   <td>Create Partition
   </td>
   <td>Yes, it enables partitioning on a fungible token.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>16
   </td>
   <td>Delete Partition
   </td>
   <td>Yes, it removes an existing empty partition.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>17
   </td>
   <td>Move Partition
   </td>
   <td>Yes, it moves a token supply across partitions.
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>18
   </td>
   <td><strong>Token (Un)lock (HIP in progress)</strong>
   </td>
   <td>Yes, lock and unlock operate on an investor wallet, supply, and partition ID.
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>


## Backward Compatibility

This proposal is designed to be fully backwards compatible with the existing fungible tokens on the Hedera network. Developers can choose to utilize the partitions feature or continue to operate their tokens as they currently do. Existing fungible tokens SDKs and APIs will remain functional and interoperable with the new partition ability primitive.

## Security Implications

The introduction of the ability to partition fungible tokens requires careful consideration of security implications. The implementation should include appropriate validation and permission checks to ensure that only authorized admins can perform the partition operations on the fungible tokens. When partitions are enabled (more than 1 partition) wallets, exchanges, and explorers must indicate what partition a token belongs to so as to accurately reflect the owner's asset balance.  

## Open Issues

N/A

##  References

ERC-1155: Multi Token Standard[ https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1155](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1155)

ERC-1410: Partially Fungible Token Standard [https://github.com/ethereum/eips/issues/1410](https://github.com/ethereum/eips/issues/1410) 

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see[ LICENSE](https://chat.openai.com/LICENSE) or ([https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0))


<!-- Footnotes themselves at the bottom. -->
## Notes

[^1]:
     A partition refers to a specific subset of tokens that share a common set of metadata or properties. Partitioning refers to the action of assigning or creating partitions within a single token supply.

[^2]:
     The primitives in Hedera's token service include operations such as token creation, token association, transfer, and token burning among others. (Please see table at the end of ## Implementation for full details.)
