---
hip: 731
title: Standarize the way to share scheduleId transactions
author: Fran Fernandez <fran@kabila.app>, Adrian Marin <adrian@kabila.app>
working-group: Fran Fernandez <fran@kabila.app>, Adrian Marin <adrian@kabila.app>, Rafael Lujan <rafa@kabila.app>
type: Standards Track
category: Application
needs-council-approval: No
status: Draft
created: 2023-05-24
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/731
---

## Abstract

This proposal aims to standardize the way of sharing the codes of a Schedule Transaction.

## Motivation

Right now if someone tries to share the id of a Schedule Transactions, for example from one dApp to different wallets, it is not supported as they are using different algorithms to obfuscate the generated code. We believe that this is a high barrier for users.

## Rationale

This is a new specification, so should not have alternative design.

## User stories

1. As an user that wants to sell nfts, I want to trade some nfts for hbar, so I want to generate a schedule transaction with nfts serial numbers and how much the receiver will pay. I want to get my code and share it with the buyer so he can execute it.
2. As an user that wants to buy nfts, I want to get a code from the seller and be able to execute it.

## Specification

We believe that the correct way to standardize the way of sharing the codes of a Schedule Transaction is to generate a code based on: ```<ScheduleId> - <ReceiverAccountId> - <CreationTimestamp>``` and then obfuscated on base64.

These parameters are necessary, so when the person who receives them introduces the code, through the ReceiverAccountId we can know if the code is correct for that AccountId, so he doesn't have to pay the fee to consult the scheduleId, the CreationTimestamp, to know if it has expired (if it has expired we do not consult the network and we do not overload it).

## Backwards Compatibility

There are no sources of backward incompatibility as this HIP simply introduces new way to use the scheduleId.

## Security Implications

No security implications noted.

## How to Teach This

Document the way to generate the code and how to use it.

## Reference Implementation

## Rejected Ideas

## Open Issues

## References

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
