---
hip: 584
title: EVM Module & Mirror EVM Archive Node
author:  Ivan Kavaldzhiev <ivan.kavaldzhiev@limechain.tech>, Mustafa Uzun <mustafa.uzun@limechain.tech>
type: Standards Track
category: Mirror
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Review
created: 2022-09-27
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/586
updated: 2022-10-04
---

## Abstract

This HIP describes the interfaces and modules that will allow the EVM implementation to be separated into a Java library.
This will enable a number of future features such as different EVM implementations, EVM execution APIs on the mirror node,
and transaction simulation and verification off of the consensus nodes. The consensus nodes would continue to use this library.
The HIP also describes initial Mirror Node APIs that will handle contract execution related queries, thus allowing the Mirror Node 
to serve the role of an EVM Archive Node.

## Motivation

Currently the EVM code is deeply embedded in consensus node logic. However ongoing user experience work 
needs EVM execution to enable features such as cost-free execution of read-only smart contract queries,
gas estimation, and transient simulation of read-write operations.

In order to maximize compatibility and reduce defects it would be best to run all these activities from the same codebase.
In order to do so a library needs to be extracted from the consensus logic and the consensus nodes and external programs
such as the mirror node.

## Rationale

In order to be possible to both execute and simulate transactions, run by the EVM used inside `hedera-node`,
we need to extract a module encapsulating all of the EVM logic.

The resulting library would allow us to fulfil the following use cases:

- Execute transactions in a regular flow with committing changes to state
- Execute transaction in a regular flow or simulations that perform read-only operations
- Execute transaction simulations that perform speculative writes without committing changes to state
- Execute transaction simulations that perform speculative writes using historical data for transaction replay, 
without committing changes to state

## User stories

- As a developer, I want to have a library with common Hedera smart contract EVM logic that I can reuse in different projects
- As a user, I want to perform `eth_call` calls from the Ethereum JSON-RPC standard
- As a user, I want to perform `eth_gasEstimate` calls from the Ethereum JSON-RPC standard
- As a user, I want a library that can be used to re-run historical EVM transactions accurately so that I can inspect 
and debug the execution of the bytecode logic.

## Specification

### EVM Library Definition

We want the EVM library to be used by multiple clients like the `hedera-services` and `hedera-mirror-node` repos
and to be able to be extended for a future use from additional clients.

To facilitate differences, we need to define interfaces, which would be inside the library 
and each client of the library (in this case `hedera-node` and `mirror-node`) would provide its own implementation.

### Mirror Node

Information will be made available via new REST API

#### Read-only queries and gas estimate REST API

A new  `/api/v1/contracts/call` POST REST API will be added to execute read-only queries and gas estimate.
Query parameter `estimate`(default = false) would determine what the result represents.

The following JSON represents a typical request body:
```json
{
  "block": "latest", 
  "data": "0x81a73ad500000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000004e5", 
  "from": "0x00000000000000000000000000000000000004e2", 
  "gas": "0x76c0", 
  "gas_price": "0x76c0", 
  "to": "0x00000000000000000000000000000000000004e4", 
  "value": "0x0"
}
```
The following JSON represents a typical response result with the information read in the query:  
With query parameter `estimate=true`
```json
{
    "gas": "0x3234333230",
    "result": "0x"
}
```
With query parameter `estimate=false` or without it
```json
{
    "gas": "0x",
    "result": "0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000002000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000037474740000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000"
}
```

## Backwards Compatibility

Since the library would duplicate some code inside `hedera-node`, there would be a need to extract
and remove this code from `hedera-node` and start using `hedera-evm` as a dependency inside `hedera-node`.
In this way `hedera-node` and `mirror-node` would reuse the same code base, and we would avoid code duplications.

`Mirror Nodes` that will support the new REST APIs should have enabled importing of `CONTRACT_BYTECODE` and `CONTRACT_STATE_CHANGE` 
sidecar types. Otherwise, executing the endpoints would result in missing runtime bytecode for execution
or using stale contract storage data.

## Security Implications

There would be some security implementations for `Mirror Nodes`. Since the invocation of `eth_call` and `eth_gasEstimate` RPC calls 
would be free of charge and the `Mirror Nodes` don’t have throttle mechanism, some attack vectors would be possible. 
The Nodes could be overloaded with huge amount of calls or calls invoking smart contract methods with huge gas usage, 
both of which might take more system usage and slow down the network for other users. A rate limit mechanism will be implemented,
so that the load put on `Mirror Nodes` to be balanced.

## How to Teach This

Respective documentation will be added.

## Reference Implementation

## Rejected Ideas

None.

## Open Issues

None.

## References

## Copyright/License

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 --
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
