---
hip: 449
title: Record stream specification for expiring smart contracts
author: Michael Tinker (@tinker-michaelj), Steven Sheehy (@steven-sheehy)
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Final
last-call-date-time: 2022-05-04T07:00:00Z
release: v0.29.0
created: 2022-04-19
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/446
updated: 2023-02-01
replaces: 16
---

## Abstract

[HIP-16](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-16) defined the lifecycle of expiring Hedera 
entities. But it did not fully specify the `(Transaction, TransactionRecord)` 
pairs the ledger will use to externalize lifecycle events to mirror nodes via the 
record stream.

In this HIP we use examples to specify how the record stream will externalize state 
changes for smart contract expiration. These state changes include:
  1. Auto-renewal of a contract
  2. Treasury return of an expired contract's non-deleted NFTs
  3. Treasury return of an expired contract's non-deleted fungible token balances
  4. Bookkeeping of an expired contract's deleted token balances
  5. Auto-removal of a contract

## Motivation

For a mirror node to track the state changes that happen as the ledger auto-renews and 
auto-removes smart contracts, it must understand how these changes are externalized 
in the record stream. Although HIP-16 offers an [example auto-renewal record](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/blob/main/docs/autorenew-feature.md#autorenewal-record) and an [example auto-removal record](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/blob/main/docs/autorenew-feature.md#entity-removal-record), 
it is silent on the `TransactionBody`'s that would accompany these records in the stream. 
It also does not address the important case of an expired contract that still owns NFTs, 
as NFTs were only _introduced_ in HIP-17.

## Rationale

- We chose the `ContractUpdateTransactionBody`, `ContractDeleteTransactionBody`, and
`CryptoTransferTransactionBody` messages to externalize as much of the auto-renew 
semantics as possible, because mirror nodes can already ingest these messages. 
- We added the new `bool permanent_removal` field to the `ContractDeleteTransactionBody` 
message to be quite explicit when a record is of a contract auto-removal, and not a
`ContractDelete` user transaction submitted via HAPI. (Mirror nodes will need to 
update their ingestion logic for the `permanent_removal=true` case.) 
- We chose to define the system `TransactionID` messages by adding a `nonce` to the 
`TransactionID` of the last user transaction handled by the ledger, because this 
scheme is the simplest known method of creating a globally unique identifier of a 
"synthetic" transaction.

## User stories

- As a mirror node operator, I need the record stream to include all state changes 
the ledger makes when auto-renewing or auto-removing a smart contract.
  
## Specification

This section lists examples of `(Transaction, TransactionRecord)` pairs that 
externalize the following state changes:
  1. Auto-renewal of a contract
  2. Treasury return of an expired contract's non-deleted NFTs
  3. Treasury return of an expired contract's non-deleted fungible token balances
  4. Bookkeeping of an expired contract's deleted token balances
  5. Auto-removal of a contract

### Auto-renewal of a contract without a funded auto-renew account

In this example, the last user record created in `handleTransaction()` had a 
`TransactionID` of:
```
transactionValidStart {
  seconds: 1650466736
  nanos: 120
}
accountID {
  accountNum: 1234
}
nonce: 3
```
The consensus timestamp of the record was:
```
consensusTimestamp {
  seconds: 1650466737
  nanos: 400
}
```

After handling this user transaction, the ledger determines contract `0.0.8888`
has expired at consensus second `1650466735`; and that its renewal fee for the next 
90 days is 1ℏ. This contract has an auto-renew account, but the account has zero
balance. Luckily, the contract itself has a balance of 0.5ℏ, meaning it can 
self-fund a 45 day renewal. The resulting `(Transaction, TransactionRecord)` 
pair in the record stream has a `ContractUpdateTransactionBody`:
```
transactionID {
  transactionValidStart {
    seconds: 1650466736
    nanos: 120
  }
  accountID {
    accountNum: 1234
  }
  nonce: 4
}
contractUpdateInstance {
  contractID {
    contractNum: 8888
  }
  expirationTime {
    seconds: 1654354735
  }
}
```
The `SignatureMap` for this `Transaction` is **empty**. (An empty `SignatureMap` is 
the universal identifying characteristic of a system-generated transaction, since
every user transaction must include at least a payer signature.)

The corresponding `TransactionRecord` is:
```
consensusTimestamp {
  seconds: 1650466737
  nanos: 401
}
transactionID {
  transactionValidStart {
    seconds: 1650466736
    nanos: 120
  }
  accountID {
    accountNum: 1234
  }
  nonce: 4
}
memo: "Contract 0.0.8888 was automatically renewed. New expiration time: 1654354735."
transactionFee: 50000000
transactionHash: "<SHA-384 hash of above body encoded in signedTransactionBytes>"
transferList {
  accountAmounts {
    accountID {
      accountNum: 98
    }
    amount: 50000000
  }
  accountAmounts {
    accountID {
      accountNum: 8888
    }
    amount: -50000000
  }
}
```
**Important:** Unlike HIP-16, we do not repeat the `ContractID` in the 
`TransactionReceipt`.  In particular, the consensus timestamp of the auto-renewal 
record is one nanosecond later than the last-handled user transaction. The hash in 
the record is of the `signedTransactionBytes` in the paired `Transaction`.

### Auto-renewal of a contract with a funded auto-renew account

In this example, the last user record created in `handleTransaction()` had a 
`TransactionID` of:
```
transactionValidStart {
  seconds: 1650466736
  nanos: 120
}
accountID {
  accountNum: 1234
}
scheduled: true
```
The consensus timestamp of the record was:
```
consensusTimestamp {
  seconds: 1650466737
  nanos: 400
}
```

After handling this user transaction, the ledger determines contract `0.0.9999`
has expired at consensus second `1650466735`; and that its renewal fee for the next 
90 days is 1ℏ. This contract has an auto-renew account `0.0.4321`, although the
balance of the account is only 1 tinybar. Because the ledger rounds partial 
renewals up to the nearest hour, this is still enough to renew the contract for 
a single hour. The resulting `(Transaction, TransactionRecord)` pair in the record 
stream has a `ContractUpdateTransactionBody`:

```
transactionID {
  transactionValidStart {
    seconds: 1650466736
    nanos: 120
  }
  accountID {
    accountNum: 1234
  }
  nonce: 1
}
contractUpdateInstance {
  contractID {
    contractNum: 9999
  }
  expirationTime {
    seconds: 1650470335
  }
}
```

In particular, the `scheduled=true` field of the user `TransactionID` is taken 
as a sort of "half-`nonce`", and the synthetic `TransactionID` still begins at
`nonce=1`.

The corresponding `TransactionRecord` is:
```
consensusTimestamp {
  seconds: 1650466737
  nanos: 401
}
transactionID {
  transactionValidStart {
    seconds: 1650466736
    nanos: 120
  }
  accountID {
    accountNum: 1234
  }
  nonce: 1
}
memo: "Contract 0.0.9999 was automatically renewed. New expiration time: 1650470335."
transactionFee: 1
transactionHash: "<SHA-384 hash of above body encoded in signedTransactionBytes>"
transferList {
  accountAmounts {
    accountID {
      accountNum: 98
    }
    amount: 1
  }
  accountAmounts {
    accountID {
      accountNum: 4321
    }
    amount: -1
  }
}
```

### Treasury return of non-deleted NFTs

In this example, the last user record created in `handleTransaction()` had a 
`TransactionID` of:
```
transactionValidStart {
  seconds: 1650466736
  nanos: 120
}
accountID {
  accountNum: 1234
}
```
The consensus timestamp of the record was:
```
consensusTimestamp {
  seconds: 1650466737
  nanos: 400
}
```

After handling this user transaction, the ledger determines contract `0.0.7777`
expired at consensus second `1649861935` without any auto-renewal funds. Now its 
week-long grace period has ended, and this contract should be permanently removed 
from the ledger state. _However_, contract `0.0.7777` still owns 3 NFTs of the
non-deleted token type `0.0.111111`---serial numbers 1, 2, and 3. The ledger needs 
to return these NFTs to the token treasury `0.0.1111` before permanently erasing 
all record of the contract.  But it can only return 2 NFTs to the treasury per 
call to `handleTransaction`, because the ledger does not want to delay the 
processing of user transactions.

The resulting `(Transaction, TransactionRecord)` pair in the record stream has 
a `CryptoTransferTransactionBody` that shows the first two serial numbers being
returned to their treasury:
```
transactionID {
  transactionValidStart {
    seconds: 1650466736
    nanos: 120
  }
  accountID {
    accountNum: 1234
  }
  nonce: 1
}
cryptoTransfer {
  tokenTransfers {
    token {
      tokenNum: 111111
    }
    nftTransfers {
      senderAccountID {
        accountNum: 7777
      }
      receiverAccountID {
        accountNum: 1111
      }
      serialNumber: 1
    }
    nftTransfers {
      senderAccountID {
        accountNum: 7777
      }
      receiverAccountID {
        accountNum: 1111
      }
      serialNumber: 2
    }
  }
}
```

The corresponding `TransactionRecord` is:
```
consensusTimestamp {
  seconds: 1650466737
  nanos: 401
}
transactionID {
  transactionValidStart {
    seconds: 1650466736
    nanos: 120
  }
  accountID {
    accountNum: 1234
  }
  nonce: 1
}
memo: "NFT treasury return(s) for pending auto-removal of contract 0.0.7777"
transactionHash: "<SHA-384 hash of above body encoded in signedTransactionBytes>"
tokenTransferLists {
  token {
    tokenNum: 111111
  }
  nftTransfers {
    senderAccountID {
      accountNum: 7777
    }
    receiverAccountID {
      accountNum: 1111
    }
    serialNumber: 1
  }
  nftTransfers {
    senderAccountID {
      accountNum: 7777
    }
    receiverAccountID {
      accountNum: 1111
    }
    serialNumber: 2
  }
}
```
Note there is no `transactionFee` for the NFT treasury return. Also, if token type
`0.0.111111` had been deleted, no treasury return would have been possible; the 
ledger would have only externalized a bookkeeping record to prompt mirror nodes to 
"zero out" the removed contract's balance of the deleted token. 

This occurs in our final example.

### Auto-removal of a contract with deleted and non-deleted token balances

As above, the last user record created in `handleTransaction()` had a 
`TransactionID` of:
```
transactionValidStart {
  seconds: 1650466736
  nanos: 120
}
accountID {
  accountNum: 1234
}
```
And as above, the consensus timestamp of the record was:
```
consensusTimestamp {
  seconds: 1650466737
  nanos: 400
}
```

After handling this user transaction, the ledger determines contract `0.0.6666`
expired at consensus second `1649861935` without any auto-renewal funds. Now its 
week-long grace period has ended, and this contract should be permanently removed 
from the ledger state. The contract owns a single NFT, serial number 3, of the 
non-deleted token type `0.0.111111`. It also owns 100 units of the non-deleted
fungible token type `0.0.222222`. Finally, contract `0.0.6666` still has 5 NFTs 
of the deleted token type `0.0.333333`, and 1000 units of the deleted fungible
token type `0.0.444444`. 

In this case the ledger does need any preparatory NFT treasury returns. It can
can return the single non-deleted NFT and the `0.0.222222` balance to their 
respective treasuries in a single step with the permanent removal of the contract
itself.

The resulting `(Transaction, TransactionRecord)` pair in the record stream has 
a `ContractDeleteTransactionBody` with `permanent_removal=true`.
```
transactionID {
  transactionValidStart {
    seconds: 1650466736
    nanos: 120
  }
  accountID {
    accountNum: 1234
  }
  nonce: 1
}
contractDeleteInstance {
  contractID {
    contractNum: 6666
  }
  permanent_removal: true 
}
```

The corresponding `TransactionRecord` is:
```
consensusTimestamp {
  seconds: 1650466737
  nanos: 401
}
transactionID {
  transactionValidStart {
    seconds: 1650466736
    nanos: 120
  }
  accountID {
    accountNum: 1234
  }
  nonce: 1
}
memo: "Auto-removal of contract 0.0.6666"
transactionHash: "<SHA-384 hash of above body encoded in signedTransactionBytes>"
tokenTransferLists {
  token {
    tokenNum: 111111
  }
  nftTransfers {
    senderAccountID {
      accountNum: 6666
    }
    receiverAccountID {
      accountNum: 1111
    }
    serialNumber: 3
  }
}
tokenTransferLists {
  token {
    tokenNum: 222222
  }
  transfers {
    accountID {
      accountNum: 2222
    }
    amount: 100
  }
  transfers {
    accountID {
      accountNum: 6666
    }
    amount: -100
  }
}
tokenTransferLists {
  token {
    tokenNum: 333333
  }
  transfers {
    accountID {
      accountNum: 6666
    }
    amount: -5
  }
}
tokenTransferLists {
  token {
    tokenNum: 444444
  }
  transfers {
    accountID {
      accountNum: 6666
    }
    amount: -1000
  }
}
```

Note that for deleted token types, it does not matter whether the type is fungible
or non-fungible. No treasury return occurs, and the record only includes a bookkeeping
entry that "zeros out" the expired contract's balance of the token---either number of
NFTs owned, or fungible units held.

## Backwards Compatibility

Entity expiration has never been enabled in a production environment, so this
specification should not break any mirror node implementation.

## Security Implications

If many contracts all expired in a small interval, each with many associated tokens 
with non-zero balances, the work involved in their expiration could increase 
creation-to-consensus time for user transactions submitted during the interval. 
However, the cost to create each second's worth of expiring contracts would be 
hundreds or even thousands of USD, making this an unattractive attack vector.

## How to Teach This

Use the examples in the above specification to illustrate how state changes from 
smart contract expiration appear in the record stream.

## Reference Implementation

Implementation is ongoing in Services branch `eth-tx-interop` via a set of changes to 
the [`com.hedera.services.state.expiry`](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/tree/eth-tx-interop/hedera-node/src/main/java/com/hedera/services/state/expiry) package.

## Rejected Ideas

We briefly considered a new type of record stream entry that consists of just a
`TransactionRecord` instead of a `(Transaction, TransactionRecord)`, but the 
increased complexity of mirror node support made it an unattractive option.

## Open Issues

To track active work, please follow the progress of issues in [this list](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22contract+auto-renew%2Fremove+%28hip-16%29%22).

## References

- [HIP-16](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-16)

## Copyright/license

This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 -- see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
